Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Ad Hoc Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/adhoc

KDN-Driven zero-shot learning for intelligent self-healing in 6G small cell
networks
Tuğçe Bilen
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Engineering, Faculty of Computer and Informatics, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
6G
Self-healing
Zero-shot learning
Knowledge-defined networking
Root cause analysis

ABSTRACT
6G cellular networks represent a significant advancement in wireless communication by offering higher data
rates, lower latency, and improved reliability. Ultra-dense small cell deployment is vital for providing enhanced
capabilities in 6G, which in turn facilitates the development of data-intensive applications. Despite the benefits,
dense small-cell deployments can also significantly increase anomaly rates. The complexity arising from the
dynamic, dense, and data-intensive environment of 6G networks presents a significant challenge for anomaly
detection and resolution. To address this issue, this paper proposes a Knowledge-Defined Networking (KDN)enabled intelligent self-healing approach for 6G small cell networks, based on zero-shot learning. Our system
continuously monitors network metrics and collects data. It utilises a semantic zero-shot learning model to
detect anomalies, including new and previously unseen ones, without requiring retraining. When an anomaly
is detected, the system analyses it using historical data and predefined rules to find the root cause. Once the
root cause is identified, the system executes self-healing actions to resolve the issue in a closed-loop manner.
The proposed system operates in an AI-native and zero-touch fashion, aligning with key 6G goals. It is evaluated
in a simulation environment configured with realistic 6G parameters, including mmWave frequency (28 GHz),
massive MIMO, and energy-aware small cells. The performance results underline that the proposed scheme
achieves lower packet loss and reduced latency compared to conventional healing approaches. These results
confirm that the architecture supports scalable, autonomous, and real-time fault management for future 6G
infrastructures.

1. Introduction
6G cellular networks enable a significant advancement in wireless
communication. 6G networks can deliver much higher data rates with
lower latency and improved reliability compared to previous generations [1–3]. Thanks to these enhanced capabilities, 6G networks
can support various emerging applications such as holographic communication, Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR) and aerial
communication [4,5]. Ultra-dense small cells are one of the main
contributors to performance improvements in 6G networks [6]. These
small, low-power base stations offer better coverage for 6G users.
Moreover, ultra-dense small cells can meet the growing demands of
6G users. Accordingly, small cells improve efficiency and enhance the
overall user experience by bringing the network closer to users.
The ultra-dense deployment of small cells enhances performance,
capacity, and coverage in 6G networks. However, managing these
small cells presents significant challenges [7]. Specifically, the probability of failures and anomalies increases with the vast number of

small cells. Additionally, these small cells generate massive volumes
of data, making real-time monitoring and management challenging. As
a result, it becomes difficult to detect and resolve errors. Small cells
may experience various anomalies due to physical or software-related
issues. Hardware problems, environmental conditions, or interference
can cause physical anomalies. On the other hand, software anomalies may result from configuration errors, software bugs, or security
breaches. Furthermore, small cells may encounter new or previously
unseen anomalies during normal operation. The highly dynamic 6G
topology further increases the likelihood of unforeseen conditions and
anomalies, as shown in Fig. 1.
The Knowledge Defined Networking (KDN) framework is a promising solution to address the challenges of ultra-dense small cell deployment in 6G networks [8]. The KDN architecture integrates the
knowledge, control, and data planes. Accordingly, the KDN architecture
enables a comprehensive understanding of network conditions and supports real-time adaptability [9]. This architecture also facilitates more
automated management through enhanced intelligence. As a result,
this holistic approach can significantly boost the potential of 6G small

E-mail address: bilent@itu.edu.tr.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2025.103984
Received 14 March 2025; Received in revised form 10 July 2025; Accepted 21 July 2025
Available online 30 July 2025
1570-8705/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Fig. 1. Overview of ultra-dense 6G networks.

cell networks by enabling more reliable, efficient, and self-optimising
cellular infrastructure.
Based on these motivations, this paper proposes a KDN-enabled
intelligent self-healing approach for 6G small cell networks using zeroshot learning. This approach aims to automatically detect and resolve
network anomalies. Furthermore, the model can identify previously
unseen anomalies through zero-shot learning. The main contributions
of the paper are summarised as follows:

to identify network traffic anomalies in 6G wireless networks, aiming
to improve resilience and enhance security.
A machine learning-driven methodology is proposed in [13] to
predict network faults and enable self-healing operations in wireless
networks. Historical fault management data is used to predict potential
failures and to increase the efficiency of network operations. A digital
twin-based self-healing architecture for 6G edge networks is presented
in [14], aiming to automate service recovery and implement proactive measures. In this work, graph neural networks are utilised for
performance predictions, with the primary goal of maintaining service
stability and enhancing network reliability. Similarly, a digital twin
framework for real-time monitoring and anomaly detection is proposed
in [15], which incorporates federated learning for anomaly detection
in Open RAN environments. The objective of that study is to detect
anomalous traffic with high accuracy and improved security.
The impact of integrating self-healing antennas into 6G small cells
to mitigate X-haul failures is evaluated in [16]. That work proposes
the use of additional antennas to enhance network resilience and
maintain service continuity during outages, aiming to increase recovery
rates and overall network performance. A framework for predicting
6G slice anomalies and optimising resource allocation based on user
behaviour is introduced in [17] to identify anomalies proactively.
The main objective is to enhance user experience, improve long-term
system performance, and reduce latency. Federated learning and Long
Short-Term Memory are used for anomaly detection in [18], aiming to
enhance real-time detection and enable effective root-cause analysis. A
framework for detecting and analysing different types of anomalies is
proposed in [19], which combines various detection algorithms and key
performance indicators. Generative methods and multi-sensor fusion
techniques are used in [20] to monitor and detect anomalies in 6G
networks.
Although these related works provide valuable insights into various
aspects of anomaly detection and self-healing, several important shortcomings remain, as summarised in Table 1. These can be summarised
as follows:

• We introduce a KDN-based novel framework that combines realtime monitoring, advanced anomaly detection, and automated
self-healing to enhance network performance and reliability. This
also enables quick adaptation to dynamic network conditions and
supports continuous learning from new data.
• We leverage zero-shot learning to create a flexible model capable of identifying both known and unseen anomalies without
retraining. The model is also effective with minimal training data.
• Our proposed self-healing framework operates in a closed-loop
manner, continuously monitoring the network, diagnosing issues,
and executing corrective actions until anomalies are resolved.
This approach ensures that the network’s reliability, effectiveness, and performance are maintained through autonomous and
adaptive self-healing capabilities.
• The proposed system is designed and evaluated using 6G-specific
features, including mmWave communication, massive MIMO, and
energy-harvesting small cells. This ensures that the framework
addresses real-world constraints and capabilities of future 6G
deployments.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 reviews
the related work in the literature. Section 3 presents the proposed
KDN-based 6G topology. Section 4 explains the proposed self-healing
scheme. Section 5 evaluates its performance. Section 6 concludes the
paper. Finally, Section 7 gives the future work.
2. Related work
Several studies in the literature focus on anomaly detection in 6G
small cell networks. A deep learning model based on spatial graphs
to analyse performance degradation in mobile networks is proposed
in [10]. The authors utilise graph neural networks to detect spatial
dependencies among base stations and facilitate root-cause analysis.
The primary objective of this study is to enhance network performance through self-healing strategies. Machine learning techniques for
anomaly detection in 6G networks are evaluated in [11], where the
focus is on the challenges of high data volumes, real-time processing,
and privacy concerns. Similarly, the utilisation of machine learning
methodologies for attack detection is explored in [12]. The paper proposes a framework that integrates various machine learning algorithms

• Most studies focus solely on detecting network problems without addressing how the network can autonomously recover. In
contrast, our proposed scheme enables autonomous network management with integrated self-healing capabilities.
• Existing works do not leverage the KDN paradigm, which is
valuable for combining historical and real-time data to detect and
respond to anomalies.
• Many studies rely on labelled data for training their models,
making it difficult to adapt to new or evolving network scenarios.
Our proposed scheme employs zero-shot learning to detect both
known and unseen anomalies without the need for retraining.
2

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen
Table 1
Comparison of related work on anomaly detection and self-healing in 6G networks.
Study

Main technique

Application area

Objective/Limitation

[10]

GNN-based
root-cause analysis

Performance
degradation
detection

Enhancing performance through self-healing; does
not cover autonomous decision-making

[11]

Machine Learning
models

6G anomaly
detection

Addresses data volume and real-time challenges;
lacks automated healing mechanisms

[12]

Ensemble Machine
Learning algorithms

Intrusion/attack
detection

Improves security and resilience; focused on
security, not system-level healing

[13]

Fault prediction
using historical data

Wireless network
fault management

Supports predictive healing; depends on past
failures and lacks adaptability to new faults

[14]

Digital Twin +
Graph Neural
Network

Edge network
self-healing

Maintains service stability using proactive healing;
limited to DT-enabled architectures

[15]

Digital Twin +
Federated Learning

Real-time anomaly
detection in Open
RAN

High accuracy detection; lacks centralised learning
model flexibility

[16]

Self-healing
antennas

X-haul link failure
recovery

Enhances resilience with hardware-based design;
focuses on physical layer solutions only

[17]

User behaviour
modelling +
Prediction

6G slice resource
allocation

Proactive anomaly detection; targets slicing, not
general anomaly types

[18]

Long Short-Term
Memory +
Federated Learning

Anomaly detection
with root-cause
analysis

Real-time detection with distributed learning;
assumes temporal patterns in faults

[19]

KPI-based hybrid
detection

Generic anomaly
detection

Uses mixed key performance indicators and
detection models; lacks a unified healing
architecture

[20]

Generative models
+ sensor fusion

6G monitoring and
detection

Fuses multiple data types for robust detection; not
focused on healing process

• Most studies target general network environments and do not
specifically address the unique challenges of ultra-dense 6G networks. Our approach explicitly focuses on these environments,
where management and anomaly resolution are significantly
more complex.
3. Proposed KDN-based 6G topology
This paper considers a KDN-based 6G topology. In this topology,
KDN facilitates the integration of various models and services without
requiring major overhauls. Also, KDN can automate network management with minimum operational cost and human involvement.
Accordingly, we can monitor and continually improve our network.
Additionally, KDN can utilise AI and machine learning-based models
for predictive maintenance. These underscore that KDN is a crucial
approach for delivering an intelligent 6G self-healing solution.
As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed KDN topology comprises three
main layers: the Knowledge Plane, the Control Plane, and the Data
Plane. The details of these layers could be summarised as follows:
• Knowledge Plane: This plane mainly includes the proposed selfhealing framework, which utilises zero-shot learning for anomaly
detection. This self-healing framework comprises four main modules: Knowledge Generation, Network Monitoring, Machine
Learning, and Self-Healing Modules. Self-healing processes are
performed here, and the results are transmitted to the data layer
via the control plane. The details of this framework and its
modules will be given in Section 4.
• Control Plane: This plane consists of controllers that send policy
updates to data planes. More specifically, the management decisions are received from the knowledge plane and transferred to
the data plane as policy rules.
• Data Plane: The user equipment (UE), small cells, and macro cells
in the 6G architecture create the data plane. More specifically,
all physical elements in the 6G architecture form this plane [21].

Fig. 2. Proposed KDN-Based 6G Topology.

Here, the management of the small cells is executed based on
the results obtained from the knowledge plane. These results are
transferred to small cells through their built-in tables from the
control plane.
4. KDN-based self-healing framework
As explained above, we propose a KDN-based self-healing framework using a zero-shot learning model in the knowledge plane. As
3

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Fig. 3. KDN-based self-healing framework.

shown in Fig. 3, this framework comprises four main modules: Knowledge Generation, Network Monitoring, Machine Learning, and SelfHealing. Therefore, the proposed framework adopts a modular design
grounded in the principles of KDN, where each module contributes
a distinct role towards intelligent anomaly management. This layered
structure enables traceability, scalability, and flexibility in handling
diverse network conditions. The details of these modules are explained
in the following sections.

The above data types were selected to provide a comprehensive
view of network state by combining quantitative metrics, qualitative
logs, and early anomaly flags. This ensures accurate root-cause correlation and supports semantic-level anomaly classification in later
stages. Here, to address potential scalability issues in ultra-dense 6G
small cell deployments, the Data Collector adopts an adaptive and
hierarchical data collection strategy. Instead of using static, uniform
intervals, the data sampling frequency is dynamically adjusted based on
network conditions such as traffic load, anomaly likelihood, and node
density. For instance, during stable periods with minimal variation
in key metrics (e.g., latency, jitter, packet loss), the system reduces
the sampling frequency to conserve resources. In contrast, when early
indicators of potential anomalies are detected, the sampling rate is
increased to ensure responsiveness.
Furthermore, to minimise central bottlenecks, a significant portion
of the preprocessing pipeline is offloaded to edge-level entities, such
as intelligent small cells or edge servers. These components perform
initial tasks, such as data cleaning, feature extraction, and threshold
comparison, locally, thereby reducing the volume of data transmitted to
the central knowledge plane. This decentralised architecture supports
horizontal scalability and enables the system to efficiently manage
thousands of small cells without overloading the central controller.
To support scalability in ultra-dense 6G environments, the Data Collector module adopts a hierarchical and adaptive monitoring architecture. Unlike fixed-interval polling mechanisms, our approach dynamically adjusts both the sampling frequency and the level of preprocessing
based on real-time network behaviour and anomaly likelihood.
At the first level, each small cell node runs a lightweight local
monitoring agent. These agents continuously track key performance
indicators such as latency, jitter, throughput, and packet loss. Instead
of forwarding all collected data, the agents autonomously determine
whether current values deviate significantly from locally maintained
statistical baselines. In stable conditions, they enter a low-frequency
sampling mode, thereby reducing measurement frequency and upstream reporting overhead. If early signs of abnormal behaviour are

4.1. Knowledge generation module
The main aim of the Knowledge Generation Module is to collect
raw data from the network and transform it into actionable knowledge. This enables more intelligent and autonomous networks [22].
To achieve this aim, the Knowledge Generation Module comprises four
main components: Data Collector, Data Preprocessor, Data Storage, and
Rule Identifier.
4.1.1. Data collector
The Data Collector continuously collects small cell performance
metrics, event logs, and anomaly indicators as raw data, as summarised
in Algorithm 1. This module serves as the foundation for subsequent
data processing and analysis, ensuring that all relevant data points
are captured accurately and consistently. The collected raw data is
categorised as follows:
• Performance Metrics: These metrics are used to evaluate the
performance of the 6G small cell network and are essential for
detecting potential issues. Key performance metrics include signal
strength, throughput, latency, jitter, and packet loss.
• Event Logs: Event logs document significant occurrences in the
network. Key logs include error, warning, reboot, and activity
records.
• Anomaly Indicators: These indicators flag potential anomalies
within the network. Examples include excessive packet loss, high
latency, high jitter, and signal strength below threshold.
4

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

that the data is well-structured for anomaly detection. The Data Preprocessor executes four main steps: data cleaning, normalisation, handling
missing values, and feature engineering. The details of these steps could
be summarised as follows:

Algorithm 1 Knowledge Generation Module
1: Input: Performance Metrics, Event Logs, Anomaly Indicators
2: Data Collector:
3: for each data source (e.g., small cell) do
4:
if network status is stable (low variation) then
5:
Collect summary metrics at reduced sampling rate
6:
Perform local threshold checks
7:
else
8:
Collect fine-grained metrics at higher sampling rate
9:
Perform anomaly flagging and event marking
10:
end if
11:
Forward local summary or anomaly indicator to Edge Node
12: end for
13: Edge Node filters and aggregates collected data
14: Forward processed data to central Knowledge Plane
15: Data Preprocessor:
16: for each collected data point do
17:
Clean and normalise the data
18:
Handle missing values and outliers
19:
Extract and engineer relevant features
20: end for
21: Data Storage:
22: for each preprocessed data point do
23:
Store the data in a structured format
24:
Organise data for easy retrieval and analysis
25: end for
26: Rule Identifier:
27: for each performance metric do
28:
Define specific rules and thresholds based on data analysis
29:
Validate and store the rules for further use
30: end for
31: return Preprocessed Data and Identified Rules

• Data Cleaning: Duplicates are removed, erroneous data entries
are corrected, and data formats are standardised to ensure consistency across small cells.
• Normalisation: Feature values are scaled to a range between 0
and 1 using min–max normalisation: 𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑑 = (𝑥 − min(𝑥))∕
(max(𝑥) − min(𝑥)).
• Handling Missing Values: Missing data is imputed using the KNearest Neighbours (KNN) method based on the values of nearby
data points.
• Feature Engineering: New features are derived to improve
model effectiveness, including Standard Deviation of Packet Size
(SDPS), Inter-Arrival Time (IAT), Peak Throughput, and Packet
Error Rate (PER).
These preprocessing steps are chosen to ensure the consistency,
completeness, and informativeness of the data before semantic encoding. In particular, the selected features (SDPS, IAT, Peak Throughput,
and PER) capture temporal, size-based, and rate-related behaviour
anomalies, which are well-suited for downstream zero-shot classification based on semantic rules.
As a result of the operations performed by the Data Collector and
Data Preprocessor, the Zero-Shot Learning Model in the Machine Learning Module is equipped with the necessary input features and reference
rule embeddings. These steps prepare the semantic embedding space
and enable accurate compatibility-based inference, as summarised in
Algorithm 1.
4.1.3. Data storage
The preprocessed data is stored and used to define the semantic
representations for the Zero-Shot Learning Model in the Machine Learning Module. This enables the model to characterise normal behaviour
patterns and known anomalies through rule-based embeddings. Additionally, this data supports the Diagnosis Engine in correlating current
anomalies with historical incidents, identifying patterns and recurring
issues. Specifically, the structured storage of historical data enables the
Diagnosis Engine to identify temporal correlations, recurring anomaly
signatures, and misclassified patterns that cannot be captured by static
rule sets alone. This justifies the module’s complexity beyond basic rule
matching.

detected (such as spikes in jitter or drops in throughput), the monitoring agent immediately switches to a high-resolution observation mode,
locally caching fine-grained samples for a configurable time window.
This decision is driven by statistical change detectors (e.g., variance
thresholds or exponentially weighted moving averages). These trigger
thresholds are configurable and can be updated dynamically based
on recent network patterns. In the second layer of the hierarchy,
edge servers serve as aggregators. They receive summarised measurements from multiple small cells and perform intermediate preprocessing operations, such as normalisation, threshold comparison, and
feature encoding. Only contextually relevant insights are sent to the
central Knowledge Plane. This architecture minimises raw data transmission, optimises CPU and memory usage at the edge, and improves
responsiveness under load.
This hierarchical design supports horizontal scalability by distributing both measurement and preprocessing tasks. Meanwhile, the adaptive sampling mechanism ensures resource efficiency by focusing monitoring efforts only on unstable or high-variability zones. The complete
structure and its operational logic are captured in Algorithm 1, and
they ensure that the data collection pipeline remains responsive, efficient, and context-aware under varying traffic and fault conditions.
This design significantly reduces bandwidth usage by transmitting only
aggregated or flagged data, and limits computational overhead by
localising lightweight processing tasks. As such, it provides a costeffective monitoring pipeline that scales well with increasing network
density.

4.1.4. Rule identifier
The Rule Identifier serves as a critical bridge between statistical
network monitoring and semantic anomaly reasoning. Its purpose is
to create clear connections between low-level features and types of
anomalies. It also aims to generate semantic representations that allow
for generalisation and adaptive behaviour within the Zero-Shot Learning framework. Unlike traditional rule-based systems that depend on
static if-else conditions, our module generates both numerical thresholds and textual rule descriptions. Together, these create a foundation
for flexible inference and knowledge-driven diagnosis.
The rules listed in Table 2 are derived from a semi-automated,
data-driven process that utilises historical logs and metric distributions collected during the data collection and preprocessing stages. For
each monitored metric, statistical profiling methods (quantile analysis,
moving averages, and deviation-based scoring) are used to identify
threshold values that distinguish between normal and anomalous states.
For example, the threshold for latency is set at the 90th percentile
of historical measurements during stable periods, while jitter anomalies are defined based on time-windowed variance exceeding learned
statistical baselines. These thresholds are then validated using known
incident logs and refined based on expert feedback. This approach
ensures that the rules are empirically grounded rather than arbitrarily
defined. Specifically, this architecture offers two significant advantages
over pure rule-based systems:

4.1.2. Data preprocessor
The raw data collected by the Data Collector is forwarded to the
Data Preprocessor for further cleaning and preparation. This ensures
5

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen
Table 2
Generalised rules for anomaly detection.
Metric & Condition

Anomaly

Latency > ThresholdLatency
Packet Loss > ThresholdPacket Loss
Jitter > ThresholdJitter
Signal Strength < ThresholdSignal Strength
Throughput < ThresholdThroughput
SDPS > ThresholdSDPS
IAT > ThresholdIAT
PER > ThresholdPER

Network Congestion
Transmission Error
Network Instability
Weak Signal
Performance Degradation
Packet Size Anomaly
Traffic Flow Disruption
Transmission Error

not only by providing labels but also by creating the entire semantic
vocabulary needed for adaptive, closed-loop self-healing. Therefore, by
embedding both anomalies and healing actions into a shared semantic
space, the proposed system enables generalisation beyond explicitly
defined anomaly-action pairs. This architecture allows the framework
to reason over previously unseen or composite anomaly patterns by
matching them with the most semantically relevant healing strategy.
Such semantic inference enables dynamic decision-making, even when
exact historical precedents are unavailable. This would allow the system not only to match but also to invent appropriate recovery strategies
in response to evolving network conditions.
4.2. Network monitoring module

• Semantic Generalisation: The use of embeddings enables the
system to match previously unseen or combined anomalies to
the most relevant rule, even if the anomaly does not meet any
predefined threshold exactly. This allows the model to recognise
new failure conditions by relating them to known concepts.
• Interoperable Anomaly-Healing Mapping: Since healing actions are also represented semantically in the Self-Healing Module, the system can select appropriate actions based on the semantic proximity between the diagnosed anomaly and available
corrective strategies. This semantic alignment provides a foundation for generalised decision-making without requiring retraining
or explicit enumeration of all possible anomaly-action pairs.

This module continuously monitors the network to detect anomalies
in real time. It operates in three main steps: data collection, feature
extraction, and anomaly assessment. The details of these steps could
be summarised as follows:
• Data Collection: This component gathers real-time performance
metrics, event logs, and anomaly indicators. It differs from the
historical data collection conducted by the Data Collector Module,
which focuses on long-term system patterns.
• Feature Extraction: For each incoming data point, relevant features are extracted. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is used
to reduce the feature space and focus on the most informative
dimensions.
• Anomaly Triggering and Classification: An initial distancebased check is performed using the extracted features. If the
Euclidean distance from known normal patterns exceeds a dynamic threshold, the data point is flagged as a potential anomaly.
Then, the Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) Model is applied to classify
the anomaly semantically.

Algorithm 2 Network Monitoring Module
1: Input: Real-Time Network Data
2: Elements: Data Collection, Feature Extraction, Anomaly Trigger-

ing, Semantic Classification
3: Step 1: Data Collection
4: for each monitoring interval do
5:
Collect real-time performance metrics
6: end for
7: Step 2: Feature Extraction
8: for each collected data point do
9:
Extract and normalise relevant features
10:
Apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
11: end for
12: Step 3: Anomaly Triggering
13: for each PCA-transformed feature vector do
14:
Compute Euclidean distance to reference normal profile
15:
if distance > threshold then
16:
Flag as potential anomaly
17:
end if
18: end for
19: Step 4: Semantic Classification
20: for each flagged anomaly do
21:
Apply Zero-Shot Learning Model for semantic classification
22:
Assign most probable anomaly label based on compatibility score
23: end for
24: return Detected Anomalies and Semantic Labels

This two-stage design separates lightweight anomaly triggering
from more detailed semantic reasoning. As described above, PCAbased feature vectors are compared against normal reference profiles.
This quick check enables fast and efficient identification of abnormal
behaviour. Once flagged, each data point is projected into the semantic
embedding space and evaluated using the ZSL model to determine the
most likely anomaly type.
This process supports real-time responsiveness and scalability. The
module adjusts its sampling interval and processing depth depending
on current network conditions. When the network is stable, monitoring
frequency is reduced. During unstable periods, finer-grained data is
collected and processed to ensure timely detection.
Additionally, this module uses the rule sets and semantic embeddings generated earlier by the Knowledge Generation Module. The
cleaned historical data and labelled rules allow the ZSL model to
reason over semantically meaningful patterns. This modular separation
ensures that the system can both learn from historical trends and
respond quickly to new anomalies. A detailed overview of this logic
is given in Algorithm 2.
4.3. Machine learning module

In addition to these numeric thresholds, each rule is paired with
a human-readable textual label that describes the underlying network
condition in semantic terms. These descriptions are embedded into a
high-dimensional vector space using a pre-trained language encoder
(BERT or Sentence-BERT). The resulting semantic embeddings serve as
the reference classes for the ZSL model. During operation, real-time feature vectors are mapped into the same semantic space using a learned
encoder. Compatibility scores are calculated to identify the most likely
anomaly type based on semantic similarity, even if the exact numerical
signature has not been seen before. In this way, the Rule Identifier
transforms low-level statistical deviations into structured, semantically
meaningful knowledge. It supports the Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) model

The Machine Learning Module utilises the zero-shot learning model
for semantic classification of anomalies. The ZSL model enables the
system to classify and reason about network faults without requiring
prior definitions or labelled training data for each specific case. For
this reason, it is particularly effective in ultra-dynamic and complex
6G environments where anomalies are diverse and evolve quickly. 1
The Machine Learning Module uses the preprocessed data and identified rules generated in the Knowledge Generation Module. These
components form the foundation for constructing semantic representations. The zero-shot learning operations performed in this module are
summarised as follows:
6

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen
Table 3
Generalised rules for anomaly detection and healing.
Anomaly

Healing action

Network Congestion
Transmission Error
Network Instability
Weak Signal
Performance Degradation
Packet Size Anomaly
Transmission Error

Redistribute network load
Repair physical connections
Synchronise network clocks
Increase transmission power
Implement load balancing
Analyse packet size variability
Enhance error correction

actions. It is designed to support closed-loop, zero-touch operations
that are critical for managing ultra-dense and dynamic 6G networks. As
summarised in Algorithm 4, the module aims to identify the root causes
of faults and apply targeted healing strategies in a timely manner. To
achieve this, the Self-Healing Module consists of two main components:
the Diagnosis Engine and the Healing Engine. Here, the Diagnosis Engine
correlates current anomaly signatures with historical patterns and semantic rules to infer the most likely root cause. The Healing Engine
then selects and applies the most suitable recovery action based on
semantic similarity and predefined mappings. The detailed operation
of these engines is described as follows:

• Semantic Embedding Generation: As given in Tables 2 and 3,
we define rules for both anomaly detection and healing strategies
as textual descriptions. These descriptions are encoded into highdimensional semantic embeddings using a pre-trained language
model. This shared space allows the system to represent both network observations and rule-based concepts in a unified manner.
Unlike traditional rule-based systems that match exact threshold
conditions, this mechanism enables flexible matching between
network states and semantic anomaly categories.
• Compatibility Function Evaluation: Once the embeddings are
generated, we evaluate the similarity between the current input
and each predefined class using a compatibility function. In our
setup, a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) is used to project input
features into the semantic space, and Euclidean distance is used
to compute similarity between the projected vector and the reference embeddings. ReLU activations are applied in the hidden
layers of the MLP to model nonlinear interactions. Based on these
scores, the system determines which semantic class (anomaly or
healing) the input is most aligned with.

Algorithm 4 Self-Healing Module
1: Input: Historical Data, Detected Anomalies, Rules, Zero Shot

Learning Model, Self-Healing Actions
2: Diagnosis Engine:
3: Initialize Diagnosed Causes
4: for each anomaly in Detected Anomalies do
5:
Find similar incidents from Historical Data
6:
Identify potential root causes from historical patterns
7:
Run Zero Shot Learning Model to predict cause of the anomaly
8:
Combine potential root causes with predicted cause
9:
for each cause in combined causes do
10:
Apply rules to refine the diagnosis
11:
if rule is violated then
12:
Infer cause based on rules
13:
Add inferred cause to combined causes
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
Validate the combined causes
17:
Append validated causes to Diagnosed Causes
18: end for
19: Healing Engine:
20: for each cause in Diagnosed Causes do
21:
Select appropriate self-healing action from Self-Healing Actions
22:
Execute selected action
23:
Monitor the network to ensure action effectiveness
24:
if anomaly persists then
25:
Iterate the process
26:
end if
27: end for
28: return Resolved Anomalies and Updated Network State

Algorithm 3 Machine Learning Module Based on Zero-Shot Learning
1: Input: Flagged anomalies from the Network Monitoring Module,

Identified Rules
2: Semantic Embedding Generation:
3: Generate textual descriptions for each rule
4: Encode textual descriptions into semantic embeddings using a

language model
5: Compatibility Evaluation:
6: Initialise MLP with ReLU layers
7: Extract feature vectors from flagged anomaly instances
8: Align features with semantic embeddings
9: Compute compatibility scores
10: Classify anomalies based on highest score
11: return Semantic Anomaly Labels

4.4.1. Diagnosis engine
The Diagnosis Engine is responsible for identifying the root causes
of anomalies detected by the Machine Learning Module. As described
in Algorithm 4, it receives real-time anomaly flags and feature vectors,
along with historical network logs stored in the Knowledge Generation
Module. To infer the cause of a given anomaly, it searches for similar
patterns in past data and evaluates semantic similarity with predefined
rule descriptions.
The Diagnosis Engine uses the same zero-shot learning model described earlier. Instead of classifying only the anomaly type, it now
compares the detected anomaly with known root causes in the semantic
embedding space. This allows the engine to reason about unseen or
composite issues, even if they have not been explicitly labelled before.
Additionally, the engine uses the predefined rule set (Table 2) to
validate or refine its diagnosis. These rules help ground the semantic
inference with explicit thresholds and conditions. Once a likely root
cause is identified, it is forwarded to the Healing Engine, which selects
the appropriate corrective action. Although the set of available healing
actions is predefined, the use of semantic embeddings allows the system
to choose the most relevant action for each diagnosed anomaly flexibly.
This enables effective matching even when the anomaly pattern is not
explicitly defined in the rule base.

It is important to note that the actual anomaly detection process (the
identification of whether a data point is anomalous) is performed in the
Network Monitoring Module using PCA and distance-based deviation
analysis. The Machine Learning Module only processes those data
points that are already flagged as potential anomalies and performs semantic classification to determine their type and corresponding healing
strategy.
This separation ensures computational efficiency and interpretability. It also aligns with the design goal of selective semantic processing.
The closed-loop feedback system further monitors post-healing states,
and in case of misclassification, re-activates the diagnosis process to
suggest alternate actions. This combination of threshold-based detection and embedding-based semantic reasoning is particularly wellsuited for scalable, zero-touch 6G network management.
4.4. Self-healing module
This module is responsible for analysing the anomalies detected
by the Machine Learning Module and executing appropriate corrective
7

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

rapidly evolving 6G environments, where the cost and delay of retraining models or exploring action spaces (as in reinforcement learning) can
be prohibitive. While the current framework does not autonomously
invent new actions, it achieves adaptive behaviour through learned
semantic inference. This characteristic makes it particularly suitable for
real-time self-healing scenarios with limited supervision.
To summarise, the proposed self-healing architecture consists of
four main modules: Knowledge Generation, Network Monitoring, Machine Learning, and Self-Healing, which interact through structured
data and control flows. These interactions ensure a continuous and
coordinated pipeline that transforms raw network metrics into semantic anomaly classifications and adaptive corrective actions. Unlike traditional architectures with static monitoring and predefined
response triggers, the proposed system is designed to be dynamic,
feedback-driven, and semantically informed.
The system operates as a modular pipeline: starting with data
acquisition and preprocessing in the Knowledge Generation Module,
continuing through rule extraction and semantic embedding construction, and then enabling real-time anomaly detection via the Monitoring
and Machine Learning Modules. Diagnosed faults are processed within
the Self-Healing Module, where semantic matching allows the system
to infer the most suitable corrective action, even for previously unseen
anomalies. The complete architecture and inter-module connections are
visualised in Fig. 3 with operational timeline steps. According to this
timeline, the chronological module interactions are also detailed in
Table 4. These flows reflect the operational timeline of the framework
and demonstrate how the modules cooperate to enable a closed-loop,
zero-touch healing mechanism.

4.4.2. Healing engine
The Healing Engine executes corrective actions to resolve detected
anomalies. Each action is performed based on the root cause diagnosed
by the Diagnosis Engine. The Healing Engine then selects the appropriate self-healing action for each diagnosed cause. Accordingly, this module maintains the network’s reliability, effectiveness, and performance.
Here, a predefined set of actions is defined based on collected data and
rules, as given in Table 3. Each healing action in Table 3 represents a
concrete and feasible network operation. These actions are not abstract
placeholders but are implemented using programmable interfaces and
real-time system feedback to enable practical execution in 6G environments. Specifically, in the case of Network Congestion, the system
may invoke dynamic load redistribution strategies by rerouting user
flows via neighbouring small cells with available capacity. Additionally, weighted round-robin scheduling or token bucket-based shaping
mechanisms are applied to prioritise latency-sensitive traffic. When
Transmission Error is diagnosed, the healing engine can trigger physical
layer adjustments (reconfiguring modulation and coding schemes, enhancing Forward Error Correction, enabling Hybrid Automatic Repeat
Request). For Network Instability, actions include distributing time
synchronisation commands to affected small cells using the Precision
Time Protocol or reinitialising desynchronised protocol layers. In the
case of Weak Signal, the system issues commands to increase the
transmission power of the small cell or adjust antenna tilt parameters
via remote electrical tilt interfaces. For Performance Degradation, the
system implements cell splitting or dynamic resource block reallocation
to balance the load more evenly across neighbouring cells. When
facing a Packet Size Anomaly, the system performs packet inspection
and applies flow-level adjustments to standardise payload formatting,
thereby improving parser stability and reducing fragmentation-induced
retransmissions. Finally, for recurring Transmission Errors, the system
enhances error correction by adapting redundancy ratios in the physical
layer.
The above explained operations are guided by the semantic
anomaly-action alignment computed through zero-shot learning and
verified in the post-action monitoring loop defined in Algorithm 4.
Specifically, after selection, the chosen action is executed, and the
network status is monitored to ensure its effectiveness. If the anomaly
persists, the same procedures are iterated. Therefore, the Diagnosis
and Healing Engines work cooperatively to identify the root causes of
detected anomalies and resolve them, as presented in Algorithm 4. This
procedure ensures that each healing action is both technically grounded
and adaptively selected based on real-time system feedback.
While the current self-healing mechanism relies on a predefined set
of corrective actions (as shown in Table 3), these actions are not triggered through static rule-based mappings. Instead, the system leverages
zero-shot learning to establish a dynamic, semantic-level mapping between anomalies and corrective strategies. Specifically, each anomaly
and each healing action is encoded into a shared high-dimensional
semantic space using textual descriptions and embedding functions.
During operation, the system computes a compatibility score between
the anomaly embedding and all candidate healing action embeddings.
Then, it selects the action with the highest alignment. This allows the
system to handle previously unseen anomaly types by reasoning over
semantic similarity rather than relying on direct, predefined pairings.
As an example, if the system encounters a novel network condition
characterised by a previously unobserved combination of packet loss,
jitter, and signal degradation, the anomaly will be embedded to reflect
its proximity to known issues like weak signal or transmission error.
Thus, the selected healing action (e.g., increasing transmission power
or enabling error correction) is chosen not by fixed rules but by semantic proximity, even if such a pattern-action pair was never explicitly
defined during training.
This mechanism bridges the gap between fixed action spaces and
adaptive decision-making. It enables the system to operate effectively in

5. Performance evaluation
5.1. Simulation environment
To evaluate the performance of our proposed 6G-oriented selfhealing framework, we conduct extensive simulations using the NS-3
network simulator. The simulated environment encompasses a 1000m by 1000-m urban area, featuring macro cells, ultra-dense small
cells, and mobile user entities. User mobility is modelled using a
random walk process to capture the dynamic link variations typical
in dense 6G deployments. Macro and small cells are assumed to be
static to reflect fixed infrastructure. The diversity of network entities
and dynamic conditions ensures that the proposed modules (knowledge generation, anomaly classification, and self-healing) are exercised
under realistic and demanding 6G scenarios. Specifically, the varying
network load and user movement patterns produce intermittent congestion, jitter spikes, and signal degradation across small cells. This
dynamic behaviour stresses the monitoring and diagnosis components
of the framework and provides realistic triggers for the closed-loop
self-healing mechanism. Moreover, these runtime fluctuations allow us
to evaluate the flexibility and generalisation capacity of the semantic
zero-shot learning model in handling unseen or composite anomaly
types.
Additionally, the simulation structure supports the hierarchical and
modular architecture of KDN, enabling realistic emulation of the data
plane (via NS-3’s traffic generation and mobility models), the control
plane (real-time monitoring and anomaly flagging), and the knowledge
plane (semantic rule formation and ZSL inference). This multi-layered
architecture mirrors the operational model envisioned for intelligent,
AI-native 6G networks.
As explained above, our simulation setup is carefully designed to
emulate realistic 6G network conditions. Specifically, small cells operate in the mmWave spectrum (28 GHz) with high-order modulation
(256-QAM), massive MIMO (8 × 8) , and limited coverage (50 m)
to reflect dense and high-capacity scenarios. Additionally, energy harvesting and high-capacity backhaul are considered to align with 6G’s
green networking and ultra-broadband principles. These simulation
8

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen
Table 4
Chronological data and control flow between system modules.
Step

Source module

Target module

Description

1

Data Collector

Data Preprocessor

Raw data is forwarded for cleaning and
normalisation.

2

Data Preprocessor

Data Storage

Cleaned and normalised data is stored
for later use.

3

Data Preprocessor

Rule Identifier

Engineered features are used to define
threshold-based rules.

4

Rule Identifier

Machine Learning
Module

Semantic rule descriptions are embedded
into the semantic space.

5

Data Storage

Machine Learning
Module

Historical data is used to support
semantic embedding and compatibility
calibration.

6

Machine Learning
Module

Network Monitoring
Module

Semantic embeddings and compatibility
functions are shared for real-time
inference.

7

Network Monitoring
Module

Machine Learning
Module

Real-time feature vectors are sent for
semantic anomaly classification.

8

Network Monitoring
Module

Diagnosis Engine

Detected anomalies are forwarded for
root cause analysis.

9

Machine Learning
Module

Diagnosis Engine

Semantic anomaly labels and
compatibility scores are used for
diagnosis.

10

Rule Identifier

Diagnosis Engine

Rule-to-anomaly mappings assist root
cause reasoning.

11

Data Storage

Diagnosis Engine

Historical incident logs are used for
correlation and confirmation.

12

Diagnosis Engine

Healing Engine

Diagnosed root causes are forwarded for
healing decision-making.

13

Healing Engine

Network Monitoring
Module

Post-healing states are monitored to
verify recovery success.

parameters are summarised in Table 5 and are chosen in accordance
with recent 6G literature. This environment provides a realistic and
sufficiently dynamic testbed to validate the responsiveness, adaptability, and scalability of the proposed self-healing architecture under 6G
operational constraints.

our scheme, high inter-arrival times indicate network
( conges∑
1 ∑𝑀 𝑗
tion. Here, we will calculate this values with 𝑁1 𝑁
𝑗=1
𝑖=1
𝑀𝑗
)
Inter-Arrival Time𝑖𝑗 .
• Packet Loss Rate: This parameter measures the rate at which data
packets are lost during transmission. In our scheme, high loss
rates indicate transmission errors.
In simulations, we
(
) calculate the
∑
Lost Packets𝑗
packet loss rate as 𝑁1 𝑁
× 100.
𝑗=1
Total Packets Transmitted

5.2. Simulation details
This section provides details about the simulation study to evaluate
the proposed self-healing framework. To ensure technical transparency
and reproducibility, we describe the evaluation metrics and healing
action mappings used in the NS-3-based simulation environment. The
following subsections outline the performance indicators monitored
during runtime and the specific healing actions triggered in response
to detected anomalies.

𝑗

• Peak Throughput: This parameter measures the highest data
transfer rate achieved within a given period. In our scheme,
low peak throughput reflects the network’s performance degradation. This value is found with min𝑁
𝑗=1 (min Throughput𝑖𝑗 ). Here,
𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑗 is the throughput for each interval i for the 𝑗th small
cell.
• Jitter Variance: This parameter measures the variability in packet
arrival times. In our scheme, high jitter variance indicates instability in the network. In simulations, we calculate the jitter
1 ∑𝑁
2
variance as 𝑁−1
𝑖=1 (Inter-Arrival Time𝑖𝑗 − 𝜇𝑗 ) . Here, 𝜇𝑗 shows
the mean inter-arrival time.
• Standard Deviation of Packet Size: This parameter measures the
variability in packet sizes. In our scheme, a high standard deviation indicates anomalies in packet√
size. In simulations, we will
∑
1 ∑𝑀𝑗
calculate this value with 𝑁1 𝑁
(𝑥 − 𝜇𝑗 )2 . Here,
𝑗=1
𝑖=1 𝑖𝑗
𝑀 −1

5.2.1. Simulation metrics
In our simulations, we use the following metrics to evaluate the
performance of the proposed scheme under realistic and dynamic 6G
conditions. These metrics enable direct assessment of the effectiveness
of the proposed anomaly detection and self-healing mechanisms.
• Average Latency: This parameter measures the time delay between a user’s data request and the response from the small cell.
In our scheme, high average latency indicates potential network
(
∑
1
congestion. In simulations, we calculate latency as 𝑁1 𝑁
𝑗=1
𝑀𝑗
)
∑𝑀𝑗
Latency𝑖𝑗 . Here, 𝑀𝑗 is the number of packets for the 𝑗th
𝑖=1

𝑗

where 𝑥𝑖𝑗 is the packet size and 𝜇𝑗 is the mean packet size for
the 𝑗th small cell.
• Error Correction Rate: This parameter measures the percentage
of detected errors that are successfully corrected. A high error correction rate indicates the efficiency
( of error correction
)
∑
Corrected Errors𝑗
mechanisms. It is calculated as 𝑁1 𝑁
×
𝑗=1
Total Errors Detected

small cell and 𝐿𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖𝑗 is the latency of the 𝑖th packet for the 𝑗th
small cell.
• Average Inter-Arrival Time: This parameter measures the average time between the arrivals of consecutive data packets. In

𝑗

100.
9

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

• Implement Load Balancing: Load balancing is implemented by
triggering vertical handovers between macro and small cells when
local traffic exceeds capacity. The selection process is based on
queue length and throughput metrics collected during runtime
[23].
• Implement Traffic Shaping: This is achieved by adjusting the
packet queueing discipline (e.g., FIFO vs. RED) and modifying the
data rate limit in TrafficControlHelper. These adjustments smooth
burst traffic and reduce jitter variance.
• Synchronise Network Clocks: Network instability caused by
desynchronisation is modelled via artificial jitter injection. Healing involves resynchronising nodes by removing the delay offset
manually during simulation time to restore time-aligned scheduling.
• Analyse Packet Size Variability: Although this is a diagnostic action, it is followed by dropping outlier flows (via packet filters) or
reducing queue priority for volatile flows. These are implemented
using QueueDisc filtering policies and per-flow weight adjustment
in NS-3.

Table 5
Simulation parameters.
Parameter

Small
cells

Macro
cells

Description

Frequency
band

28 GHz

3.5 GHz

mmWave support for small
cells; sub-6 GHz macro
coverage

Transmission
power

1 W

20 W

Lower transmit power in
mmWave 6G small cells

Reception
power

0.5 W

0.5 W

Signal reception power

Coverage
range

50 m

500 m

Reduced due to mmWave
path loss in small cells

Modulation
scheme

256-QAM

64-QAM

Higher-order modulation
enabled in 6G

Antenna gain

10 dBi

10 dBi

Beamforming support in
small cells

Backhaul
capacity

10 Gbps

1 Gbps

Fibre/wireless high-speed
6G backhaul

Bandwidth

100 MHz

20 MHz

Wideband channels in 6G
small cells

Energy
harvesting
Rate

10 mW

5 mW

Green energy-aware
operation

MIMO
Configuration

8 × 8

4 × 4

Massive MIMO at the edge

Path loss
model

NYU
mmWave

Two-Ray
Ground

mmWave propagation for
6G small cells

Carrier
frequency

28 GHz

3.5 GHz

High-frequency operation
for dense deployments

5.3. Semantic alignment visualisation

Traffic model

Poisson +
Bursty

Poisson

Bursty traffic used to
simulate real-time services
in 6G

To further support the validity of the simulation setup and demonstrate how the proposed zero-shot learning model operates under realistic 6G network conditions, we provide a semantic alignment visualisation in Fig. 4(a). This figure illustrates how real-time feature vectors
collected during simulation are projected into the same semantic embedding space as the predefined anomaly classes and healing actions.
As described in Section 4.3, the model embeds textual rule definitions
and network data into a shared high-dimensional space. For the purpose of visualisation, we apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
to reduce the embedding space to two dimensions. The projection
shows three types of points: red circles correspond to known anomaly
types (e.g., Network Congestion), blue squares denote feature vectors extracted from live simulation data during anomalous conditions,
and green triangles represent available healing strategies (e.g., Adjust
Transmission Power). This visual evidence confirms that the model
aligns observed network behaviour with its most semantically similar
anomaly class and healing response. For example, simulated events
involving jitter and packet loss are positioned near the ‘‘Transmission
Error’’ cluster and close to the ‘‘Enable Error Correction’’ action. These
alignment patterns highlight the semantic inference capability of the
system, which generalises beyond fixed threshold rules. Therefore,
this embedding-based mapping, visualised through simulation data,
reinforces the realism of the simulation environment and verifies that
the proposed zero-shot learning mechanism functions effectively under
the simulated 6G conditions.
To further illustrate the semantic alignment capabilities of the proposed zero-shot learning model, Fig. 4(b) presents a two-dimensional
t-SNE visualisation. This figure displays anomaly-healing pairs where
each anomaly embedding is semantically linked to its most appropriate
healing action based on their proximity in the learned embedding
space. The embeddings are derived from textual rule descriptions and
processed via a pre-trained language encoder, as described in Section 4.3. Each line in the plot connects an anomaly class (𝐴𝑖 ) to its
most semantically compatible healing action (𝐻𝑖 ). The closeness of the
paired points confirms that the system is able to map network faults
to relevant corrective strategies through semantic reasoning, without
relying on task-specific retraining. This behaviour directly supports the

Each action is executed by the self-healing engine upon detection
and diagnosis of the corresponding anomaly. All parameter changes
happen during the simulation runtime. This keeps the environment
dynamic, allowing us to observe the direct effects on performance
metrics. This implementation ensures full reproducibility of results and
traceability of healing effects.

5.2.2. Self-healing actions
To provide full transparency of the proposed architecture and address reproducibility concerns, this subsection outlines how the conceptual self-healing actions were practically realised in the simulation
environment. Each action is mapped to a measurable and observable intervention in NS-3. This allows us to simulate realistic healing
behaviours and assess their effectiveness under 6G conditions. Accordingly, each self-healing action defined in Table 3 is operationalised
within the NS-3 simulation environment through targeted modifications on system parameters or network behaviours. These implementation mappings ensure that the healing process is both observable and
verifiable within a controlled 6G scenario. The details of self-healing
actions could be summarised as follows:
• Increase Transmission Power: This action increases the TxPower
attribute of the affected small cell node using the SetTxPower()
function in the NS-3 LTE or mmWave modules. This change
enhances signal strength and reduces packet loss caused by weak
coverage.
• Redistribute Network Load: This action initiates reassociation of
UEs to neighbouring small cells based on real-time signal quality
and current load, when triggered. We simulate this by modifying
cell association tables and forcing a handover using X2-based
handover procedures in NS-3.
• Repair Physical Connections: Physical link issues are modelled
using adjustable error models (e.g., RateErrorModel). Healing this
anomaly is implemented by reducing the ErrorRate or LossRate of
the affected link interface dynamically during simulation time.
• Enhance Error Correction: This action increases the Forward Error
Correction (FEC) effectiveness by modifying the coding rate or
error handling threshold in the physical or MAC layer settings. In
NS-3, this is emulated by reducing packet drop probability under
the same SINR conditions.
10

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Fig. 4. Visualisation of semantic embedding space. (a) PCA projection shows clustered anomaly and healing classes. (b) t-SNE projection highlights pairwise semantic alignment
between anomalies and corrective actions.

Fig. 5. Comparison of average latency and inter-arrival time.

model’s ability to generalise beyond predefined conditions and enables
adaptive decision-making when facing unseen or composite anomalies.
Unlike traditional rule-based approaches that require explicit mappings, this embedding-based alignment ensures flexibility and supports
the system’s closed-loop, zero-touch operation. Together with the PCA
visualisation in Fig. 4(a), this t-SNE-based representation highlights
the robustness and interpretability of the proposed semantic matching
architecture.

12 of Algorithm 2. Consequently, faster and more effective latency reduction is achieved. This capability is especially critical in 6G small cell
environments, where rapid anomaly response is necessary to maintain
low-latency communication for real-time and immersive applications
such as XR and holographic messaging. Fig. 5(b) illustrates the comparative performance of the conventional and our ZSL-based self-healing
approaches in terms of average inter-arrival time. Similar to latency,
the inter-arrival time increases until it exceeds a critical threshold of
15 ms, after which the self-healing mechanisms are triggered. The
conventional approach shows a gradual decrease with minor fluctuations, indicating moderate improvements in mitigating congestion. In
contrast, our proposed approach utilises advanced learning algorithms
and real-time data to adapt and optimise network conditions more
efficiently, as described in Algorithm 1. Monitoring inter-arrival time is
particularly relevant in mmWave-based 6G deployments, where beam
misalignment, blockage, or congestion can introduce bursty traffic behaviour. The proposed scheme’s ability to stabilise this metric indicates
enhanced flow continuity and reduced queuing effects. Therefore,
the ZSL-based scheme maintains optimal network performance more
effectively, as depicted in Fig. 5(b).
We evaluate the packet loss rate of the conventional and ZSLbased self-healing methods in Fig. 6(a). When the packet loss rate
exceeds a threshold, self-healing is triggered. The conventional method
results in a gradual decrease with slight fluctuations. Conversely, our
ZSL-based model maintains a consistently lower packet loss rate postintervention. By integrating adaptive learning models, the ZSL-based
self-healing mechanism significantly enhances the network’s resilience
and performance. This is particularly important in 6G networks operating in high-frequency bands, where link instability, interference,

5.4. Simulation results
In this part, we present the simulation results to evaluate the
effectiveness of our proposed self-healing framework under 6G-specific
conditions. We compare the performance of our KDN-driven, ZeroShot Learning (ZSL)-based intelligent self-healing scheme with a conventional rule-based self-healing mechanism. The comparison focuses
on key performance indicators such as latency, packet loss, jitter,
and error correction efficiency to highlight the advantages of the
proposed healing framework in highly dynamic and dense network
environments.
We first evaluate the average latency to compare the performance
of our ZSL-based self-healing approach with the conventional method,
as shown in Fig. 5(a). Initially, latency increases until it reaches a
threshold of 60 ms, which triggers the self-healing mechanisms. After
this point, the conventional method shows a moderate reduction in
latency. In contrast, our proposed approach demonstrates a significant
and rapid decrease. Specifically, the ZSL-based scheme is more efficient
because it quickly identifies and addresses anomalies, as shown in line
11

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Fig. 6. Comparison of packet loss rate and peak throughput.

Fig. 7. Comparison of jitter variance and standard deviation of packet size.

and blockages can cause sporadic transmission errors. The ability to
rapidly contain and mitigate such losses without predefined retraining improves the system’s robustness in dynamic environments. Fig.
6(b) shows the throughput comparison between the proposed and
conventional self-healing approaches. When a low throughput value
is detected, the self-healing process is initiated. After this point, both
methods exhibit an increase; however, our proposed approach achieves
a steeper growth curve. The conventional method provides a moderate
increase, whereas the ZSL-based scheme utilises a closed-loop feedback
mechanism (as described in Algorithm 4) to continuously assess and
improve throughput. This capability aligns with the high-throughput
demands of next-generation 6G services such as tactile internet, realtime video analytics, and ultra-HD streaming. The proposed architecture’s feedback-driven throughput stabilisation mechanism ensures
sustained performance under dynamic traffic loads.
Fig. 7(a) presents the jitter variance comparison. After the selfhealing trigger point, our ZSL-based scheme rapidly reduces jitter
variance. In contrast, the conventional method achieves a more gradual
reduction. The proposed model predicts future network states using
historical and real-time data (Algorithm 1), enabling proactive adjustments that lead to improved performance. In 6G networks jitter can be
significantly affected by beam misalignment, frequent handovers, and
rapid user mobility. The ability to anticipate and stabilise such variance
is essential for latency-sensitive applications. Fig. 7(b) compares the
standard deviation of packet sizes. Our proposed approach achieves
a faster reduction in variance after triggering the healing mechanism.
This dynamic adjustment is achieved via advanced learning algorithms
and is executed through Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4. High variability
in packet size is often linked to bursty or problematic traffic patterns.
This is especially true in environments with diverse data flows and
limited buffers, which are common in 6G edge networks. Controlling
this variance helps reduce parser overhead, buffer oscillation, and improves overall queuing efficiency. Meanwhile, the conventional method
responds more slowly since it relies on static rule mappings without

semantic generalisation or adaptive recalibration based on evolving
traffic conditions.
As shown in Fig. 8, we evaluate error correction efficiency across
three dimensions: time, number of errors, and network load. Fig. 8(b)
shows that our proposed methodology consistently maintains higher
error correction efficiency. This indicates that the system can react
quickly and effectively when errors first appear. Fig. 8(a) reveals that
the conventional approach struggles to scale with increasing error load.
This is because it lacks a feedback mechanism to revise or enhance
corrective actions based on evolving error patterns. Fig. 8(c) shows
that our method handles increasing network load more gracefully,
benefiting from adaptive learning as described in Algorithm 3. In 6G
environments with dense traffic and frequent interference, maintaining
correction efficiency under load is critical. The ability to update healing
decisions based on real-time feedback allows the proposed model to
remain stable under stress, unlike static methods. By contrast, the conventional scheme applies the same predefined action regardless of the
context or effectiveness of previous corrections. This leads to repeated
inefficiencies and unresponsiveness under high-stress conditions.
In addition to the above evaluations, to quantify the resource impact
of the proposed hierarchical and adaptive data collection strategy, we
simulated three representative network load conditions: low (sparse
traffic), medium (mixed user activity), and high (dense anomaly-prone
environment). Fig. 9(a) presents the results in terms of telemetry bandwidth usage and CPU overhead. The static sampling baseline, which
operates at a fixed collection frequency regardless of network conditions, consistently incurs high monitoring cost. In contrast, the adaptive
scheme dynamically adjusts its sampling frequency and preprocessing
intensity based on local anomaly likelihood and temporal metric stability. Specifically, in low-load conditions, the adaptive method achieves
up to 75% reduction in bandwidth usage and 66% reduction in CPU
load, while still maintaining reactivity to unexpected metric deviations.
Under high load, overhead converges to that of static sampling, ensuring maximum responsiveness. These results demonstrate that the
12

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Fig. 8. Error correction rates of conventional and proposed approaches.

proposed method achieves a favourable balance between efficiency
and accuracy, making it scalable and cost-effective for ultra-dense 6G
deployments where telemetry overhead is a critical concern.
Also, to quantitatively demonstrate the responsiveness of our proposed monitoring pipeline, we evaluate anomaly detection latency as
a function of the sampling interval. Fig. 9(b) presents a comparative
analysis between our adaptive zero-shot learning (ZSL)-based monitoring module and a conventional fixed-sampling mechanism. As seen
in the results, the latency of the conventional model increases almost
linearly with the interval due to its inability to prioritise observations
under dynamic network behaviour. In contrast, our ZSL-based approach
dynamically increases sampling frequency in high-risk periods and
reduces it during stable operation. This adaptive mechanism leads to
consistently lower detection latency, with up to 35% improvement
observed at 100 ms sampling. The results underline the model’s ability
to maintain detection responsiveness while reducing redundant measurements and avoiding unnecessary bandwidth usage, thereby aligning
with the efficiency goals of ultra-dense 6G networks.
Similarly, to validate the scalability of our edge-enhanced architecture, we measure the CPU utilisation of the monitoring subsystem as
the number of small cells increases. Fig. 9(c) compares two deployment
strategies: a centralised monitoring baseline and our edge-offloaded
ZSL-based design. In the centralised approach, all raw data is pushed to
a central controller, which leads to rapid CPU saturation as the system
scales. Conversely, our proposed model performs feature extraction,
threshold comparison, and preliminary cleaning at the edge, significantly reducing upstream processing costs. For instance, at 1000 small
cells, our design reduces CPU usage by over 17%, avoiding overload
conditions. These results confirm that the proposed hierarchical data
collection strategy not only maintains high accuracy but also scales efficiently under dense deployment scenarios, with lower computational

burden and better resource distribution. This directly addresses the
reviewer’s concern on the effectiveness and overhead of the proposed
adaptive collection method.
Overall, the simulation results confirm that the proposed ZSL-based
self-healing framework significantly improves network performance
across multiple key metrics compared to conventional rule-based approaches. The observed improvements in metrics demonstrate the system’s ability to manage anomalies effectively in dense and dynamic
network environments. Accordingly, the suitability of the proposed
approach is highlighted for 6G scenarios that demand autonomous,
real-time, and scalable fault management.
5.5. Alignment with 6G design principles
The proposed self-healing framework is designed specifically to
address the emerging challenges of 6G networks. Each design choice
is intentionally made to meet specific 6G capabilities and expectations.
This section outlines how the architecture and its constituent modules
align with the key 6G design objectives. The details of this alignment
could be summarised as follows:
• Ultra-Dense Small Cells: The system is developed for anomaly
detection and recovery in ultra-dense small cell deployments. The
simulation includes small cells with short coverage (50 m) and
mmWave operation (28 GHz) to reflect dense 6G networks.
• AI-Native and Semantic Intelligence: The Machine Learning
Module uses zero-shot learning with semantic embeddings. This
allows real-time anomaly detection without retraining. It supports
6G’s goal of AI-native and adaptive networks.
• Zero-Touch and Self-Healing: The self-healing module works in
a closed loop. It runs actions based on semantic diagnosis and
13

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Fig. 9. Evaluations for data collection strategy.

real-time monitoring. This enables zero-touch operation, which is
critical for scalable and autonomous 6G systems.
• Knowledge-Defined Networking (KDN): The system uses a KDN
structure with real-time data, knowledge generation, and control.
This supports 6G’s aim for programmable, learning-based control
planes.
• High-Frequency (mmWave) Operation: The simulation uses
28 GHz frequency, 256-QAM modulation, and the NYU mmWave
model. These reflect 6G radio access conditions and support
evaluation of signal degradation and congestion.
• Green and Sustainable Design: The model includes energy harvesting (10 mW for small cells). The framework reduces retransmissions and balances load to improve energy efficiency, in line
with 6G’s green networking goals.

incorporates 6G-compliant parameters such as mmWave frequencies,
massive MIMO, energy harvesting, and ultra-dense small cell layouts.
These choices ensure that the proposed solution is evaluated under
realistic 6G constraints. Compared to conventional approaches, our
intelligent self-healing mechanism reduces packet loss and latency
more effectively. The results also confirm that the proposed method
enables AI-native and zero-touch fault management. Accordingly, it
offers a scalable and flexible path towards resilient and autonomous
6G infrastructures.
7. Future work
Given the complexity and heterogeneity of 6G environments, future
systems can benefit from incorporating multi-modal data sources such
as IoT devices, user behaviour, traffic dynamics, and environmental
signals. This richer context can support more robust anomaly detection
and enable the discovery of complex patterns and relationships. As
future work, we aim to utilise multi-modal data to further enhance the
efficiency and adaptability of the self-healing process.
Additionally, while the current framework leverages predefined
healing actions guided by zero-shot learning, it enables dynamic responses to previously unseen anomalies without retraining. In future
work, we plan to explore reinforcement learning (RL)-based extensions
to autonomously learn and optimise novel healing strategies over time,
thereby further improving adaptability and long-term performance in
complex 6G environments.

Together, these features show that the proposed system is designed
specifically for 6G. The architecture is modular, adaptive, and based
on semantic intelligence. It is different from general 5G or LTE systems
and supports the unique needs of future networks.
6. Conclusion
Ultra-dense 6G small cell networks are essential to meet the demands of next-generation data-intensive applications. However, these
networks experience frequent anomalies and generate large amounts
of data. This makes real-time monitoring and management challenging. Consequently, anomaly detection and correction remain critical
challenges. This paper proposes a KDN-based self-healing framework
for 6G small cell networks using zero-shot learning. The proposed
model adaptively manages and resolves anomalies without requiring
prior definitions of specific fault types. Once an anomaly is detected,
self-healing actions are executed autonomously. The simulation setup

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Tuğçe Bilen: Writing – original draft.
14

Ad Hoc Networks 178 (2025) 103984

T. Bilen

Declaration of competing interest

[14] P. Yu, J. Zhang, H. Fang, W. Li, L. Feng, F. Zhou, P. Xiao, S. Guo, Digital twin
driven service Self-Healing with graph neural networks in 6G edge networks,
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 41 (11) (2023) 3607–3623, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JSAC.2023.3310063.
[15] Y. Rumesh, D. Attanayaka, P. Porambage, J. Pinola, J. Groen, K. Chowdhury,
Federated learning for anomaly detection in open RAN: Security architecture
within a digital twin, in: 2024 Joint European Conference on Networks and
Communications & 6G Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit), 2024, pp. 877–882, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/EuCNC/6GSummit60053.2024.10597083.
[16] M.Y. Selim, A.E. Kamal, Robust X-haul failure mitigation for 6G networks: Adding
more self-healing antennas to small cells, in: 2023 International Telecommunications Conference (ITC-Egypt), 2023, pp. 457–462, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ITC-Egypt58155.2023.10206115.
[17] Z. Ming, H. Yu, T. Taleb, User request provisioning oriented slice anomaly
prediction and resource allocation in 6G networks, in: ICC 2024 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2024, pp. 3640–3645, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ICC51166.2024.10622281.
[18] S.B. Ruba, N.E.-H. Yellas, S. Secci, Anomaly detection for 5G softwarized
infrastructures with federated learning, in: 2022 1st International Conference on
6G Networking (6GNet), 2022, pp. 1–4, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/6GNet54646.
2022.9830390.
[19] J. Mendoza, I. de-la Bandera, J. Burgueño, C. Morillas, D. Palacios, R. Barco,
Anomaly detection and analysis framework for mobile networks, in: 2021
Joint European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Summit
(EuCNC/6G Summit), 2021, pp. 359–364, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/EuCNC/
6GSummit51104.2021.9482529.
[20] G. Rathinavel, N. Muralidhar, N. Ramakrishnan, T. O’Shea, Efficient generative
wireless anomaly detection for next generation networks, in: MILCOM 2022 2022 IEEE Military Communications Conference, MILCOM, 2022, pp. 594–599,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MILCOM55135.2022.10017520.
[21] Q-learning driven routing for aeronautical ad-hoc networks, Pervasive Mobile Comput. 87 (2022) 101724, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2022.101724,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574119222001377.
[22] T. Bilen, B. Canberk, Binary context tree based middleware for next generation
context aware networks, in: 2015 3rd International Conference on Future Internet
of Things and Cloud, 2015, pp. 93–99, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FiCloud.2015.
67.
[23] T. Bilen, B. Canberk, Deliver the content over multiple surrogates: a request routing model for high bandwidth requests, Comput. Commun. 146
(2019) 39–47, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2019.07.009, https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366418309885.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This study was supported by the Research Fund of the Istanbul
Technical University (ITU). Project ID: ITUBAP 46295, Project Code:
MAB-2024-46295.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] T. Bilen, Integrating queuing theory and gbm for dynamic resource allocation in
6g networks, Mus Alparslan University Journal of Science 13 (1) (2025) 70–80,
http://dx.doi.org/10.18586/msufbd.1672775.
[2] Y. Zhang, Q. Hu, M. Peng, Y. Liu, G. Zhang, T. Jiang, Interdependent Cell-Free
and cellular networks: Thinking the role of Cell-Free architecture for 6G, IEEE
Netw. 38 (5) (2024) 247–254, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2023.3336218.
[3] T. Bilen, B. Canberk, Learning-vector-quantization-based topology sustainability
for clustered-aanets, IEEE Netw. 35 (4) (2021) 120–128, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MNET.011.2000688.
[4] M. Zhang, L. Shen, X. Ma, J. Liu, Toward 6G-Enabled mobile vision analytics
for immersive extended reality, IEEE Wirel. Commun. 30 (3) (2023) 132–138,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.023.2200557.
[5] T. Bilen, B. Canberk, Content delivery from the sky: drone-aided load balancing
for mobile-cdn, EAI Endorsed Trans. Indus. Netw. Intell. Syst. (2022) 173606,
http://dx.doi.org/10.4108/eai.9-3-2022.173606.
[6] P. Yang, Y. Xiao, M. Xiao, S. Li, 6G wireless communications: Vision and
potential techniques, IEEE Netw. 33 (4) (2019) 70–75, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MNET.2019.1800418.
[7] K.M.S. Huq, J. Rodriguez, I.E. Otung, 3D network modeling for THz-Enabled
ultra-fast dense networks: A 6G perspective, IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag. 5 (2)
(2021) 84–90, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.2000048.
[8] P.A.D.S.N. Wijesekara, S. Gunawardena, A comprehensive survey on KnowledgeDefined networking, Telecom 4 (3) (2023) 477–596, http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
telecom4030025, URL https://www.mdpi.com/2673-4001/4/3/25.
[9] J. Zhu, M. Zhao, S. Zhang, W. Zhou, Exploring the road to 6G: ABC —
foundation for intelligent mobile networks, China Commun. 17 (6) (2020) 51–67,
http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/JCC.2020.06.005.
[10] L. Mata, M. Sousa, P. Vieira, M.P. Queluz, A. Rodrigues, On the use of spatial
graphs for performance degradation Root-Cause analysis toward Self-Healing
mobile networks, IEEE Access 12 (2024) 20490–20508, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2024.3361284.
[11] N. Nezhadsistani, B. Stiller, ML-Based anomaly detection in 6G networks: A
survey on the current status, challenges, and future directions, 2024, pp. 75–83,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/6GNet63182.2024.10765631.
[12] M.M. Saeed, R.A. Saeed, A.S.A. Gaid, R.A. Mokhtar, O.O. Khalifa, Z.E. Ahmed,
Attacks detection in 6G wireless networks using machine learning, in: 2023 9th
International Conference on Computer and Communication Engineering, ICCCE,
2023, pp. 6–11, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCCE58854.2023.10246078.
[13] L. Mata, M. Sousa, P. Vieira, M.P. Queluz, A. Rodrigues, A machine learning
driven methodology for alarm prediction towards Self-Healing in wireless networks, in: 2024 Wireless Telecommunications Symposium, WTS, 2024, pp. 1–6,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WTS60164.2024.10536674.

Tuǧçe Bilen received her B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees
from the Computer Engineering Department of Istanbul
Technical University (ITU), Turkey, in 2015, 2017, and
2022, respectively. During her graduate studies, she served
as a Research and Teaching Assistant in the same department. She is currently an Assistant Professor in the
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Engineering
at Istanbul Technical University. Her Ph.D. thesis received
several prestigious awards, including the First Prize in Science and Technology from the Turkish Academy of Sciences
(TÜBA) in 2023, the ‘‘Best Ph.D. Thesis Award’’ from ITU
in 2022, and the ‘‘Serhat Özyar Young Scientist of the Year
Honorary Award’’ in 2023. Her research interests include 6G
networks, Knowledge-Defined Networking (KDN), artificial
intelligence for network management, and digital twins. She
focuses on the integration of intelligent systems into future
network architectures. She also serves as a reviewer for
several international journals.

15

