ACCEPTED FROM OPEN CALL

Conflict Mitigation Framework and Conflict
Detection in O-RAN Near-RT RIC
Cezary Adamczyk and Adrian Kliks

Abstract

The steady evolution of the Open RAN concept sheds light on xApps and their potential use
cases in O-RAN-compliant deployments. There
are several areas where xApps can be used that
are being widely investigated, but the issue of mitigating conflicts between xApp decisions requires
further in-depth investigation. This article defines a
conflict mitigation framework (CMF) built into the
existing O-RAN architecture; it enables the Conflict Mitigation component in O-RAN’s Near-Real-Time RAN Intelligent Controller (Near-RT RIC)
to detect and resolve all conflict types defined
in the O-RAN Alliance’s technical specifications.
Methods for detecting each type of conflict are
defined, including message flows between NearRT RIC components. The suitability of the proposed CMF is proven with a simulation of an
O-RAN network. Results of the simulation show
that enabling the CMF allows balancing the network control capabilities of conflicting xApps to
significantly improve network performance, with
a small negative impact on its reliability. It is concluded that defining a unified CMF in Near-RT
RIC is the first step toward providing a standardized method of conflict detection and resolution
in O-RAN environments.

Introduction

The concept of open radio access networks
(O-RAN) has been widely investigated in recent
years by large organizations comprising mobile
network operators (MNOs), telecommunications
companies, and research facilities. One of such
organizations is the O-RAN Alliance, which formulates technical specifications to guide the industry
toward O-RAN. Its efforts enable researchers and
companies to build upon the laid foundations,
with each new series of technical specifications
providing details of the ideas that drive the whole
O-RAN concept [1].
The openness of O-RAN enables novel
approaches to operating RAN and fulfilling new
deployment scenarios. First of all, the interfaces between logical components of O-RAN are
standardized and open. This enables interchangeability of O-RAN components manufactured by
various vendors without limitation of network
functionality. This is a significant change compared to traditional “proprietary” RANs, where
RAN hardware and software are usually provided by a single vendor. Freeing MNOs from this

dependency largely expands the possibilities of
network evolution.
The next unique aspect of O-RAN is the introduction of new components that can influence
the RAN operation. These include Non-Real-Time
(Non-RT) and Near-Real-Time (Near-RT) RAN Intelligent Controllers (RICs), the former of which is a
part of the Service Management and Orchestration
(SMO) framework. These logical functions react to
current and forecasted future network states and
adapt its parameters to optimize performance.
Last, but not least, the accessibility of O-RAN
is accelerated with the concept of applications in
RICs. These applications run in the Non-RT RIC
(called rApps) and in the Near-RT RIC (called
xApps). Both rApps and xApps can be developed
by independent parties and then deployed on all
O-RAN-compliant platforms, regardless of their
hardware and software vendor. The aim of rApps
and xApps is to influence the network operation
from the RICs. For example, an rApp can realize
a use case to adjust radio resource allocation policies to reduce latency and improve performance
in dynamic handover for V2X scenarios [2]; the
Non-RT RIC then interfaces with the Near-RT RIC
to provide policy updates provided by rApps. An
example of an xApp is an application that manages radio resources in such a way as to maximize
Quality of Service (QoS) for a group of users [2]
using a dedicated interface to send control messages to RAN nodes.
Prioritization within all areas of the O-RAN
space is decided upon in the Minimum Viable
Plan (MVP) toward the commercialization of
the concept [3]. It comprises key end-to-end use
cases that are applicable in commercial RAN, priorities of which are chosen by MNO members of
O-RAN Alliance. In June 2021, the priority was
set on use cases such as traffic steering, QoS optimization, or Massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (mMIMO) optimization. Since then, multiple
new use cases for O-RAN have been defined,
with energy saving being one of the most important new focuses for network operators [2]. All
of these use cases are to be fulfilled using various xApps and rApps working concurrently in the
RICs. As multiple applications can be deployed
and activated in the network at the same time,
their influences on the network operation may
conflict with each other. Such conflicts need to
be detected and mitigated in both Non-RT and
Near-RT domains.

The authors define a conflict
mitigation framework built into
the existing O-RAN architecture;
it enables the Conflict Mitigation
component in O-RAN’s Near-RealTime RAN Intelligent Controller
to detect and resolve all conflict
types defined in the O-RAN Alliance’s technical specifications.

Cezary Adamczyk and Adrian Kliks were with Poznan University of Technology, Poland.

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

0163-6804/23/$25.00 © 2023 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Digital Object Identifier:
10.1109/MCOM.018.2200752

199

FIGURE 1. Areas of potential control conflict in O-RAN architecture.
This article proposes a novel conflict mitigation
framework (CMF) to efficiently detect and resolve
conflicts between network control decisions made
by xApps in Near-RT RICs. The key contributions
of this work are as follows: first, we present a comprehensive framework for conflict mitigation in
O-RAN, which monitors network events to detect
and resolve all conflict types between xApps,
and which we propose to make standardized.
Secondly, based on that framework, we propose
procedures to mitigate the conflicts, along with
detailed templates of exchanged messages. Finally,
we propose a pragmatic way of resolving conflicts
between same-importance (i.e., of the same level in
the hierarchy) RAN control decisions based on prioritization and provide simulation results that show
how this approach influences the network. Lastly,
we outline the expected next steps in research of
conflict mitigation in O-RAN.

conflIcts between rAn control decIsIons

Although O-RAN’s flexibility and novel intelligent
RAN components allow for robust RAN optimization, these features also create unique challenges in controlling the network. Control conflicts
are possible as multiple agents can decide on
RAN operation parameters. These conflicts can
potentially nullify or lessen the decisions’ influence on the network performance, so they should
be avoided where possible with proper network
setup [4]. However, the complex dependencies
between RAN control activities and potential
expansion of network control measures make
complete mitigation of conflicts with static configuration not viable. Thus, any RAN control conflicts
that appear during O-RAN network operation
need to be detected and resolved. For that purpose, Conflict Mitigation (CM) components are
envisioned in the Near-RT RIC and in the NonRT RIC [5, 6]. Although the O-RAN architecture
sections out the CM logic only in the RICs and it
is the main focus of this article, some CM capabilities could be realized on the SMO level (and
outside of the Non-RT RIC).
Control decision conflicts can happen at many
levels in the O-RAN architecture. Within RICs,
these conflicts can happen between xApps in a
Near-RT RIC and between rApps in the Non-RT
RIC when control activities of applications contradict each other. Other than that, Near-RT RICs

200

may also conflict each other, specifically if they
control RAN nodes located in close proximity.
These conflicts between equivalent components
can be referred to as horizontal conflicts. Control conflicts can also happen between components on different levels of the architecture, that
is, between the Non-RT RIC and Near-RT RICs.
An example of such a type of conflict is when an
xApp either acts against a policy, or contradicts
a control decision provided by the Non-RT RIC.
These conflicts can be named vertical conﬂicts. All
the considered areas of potential conflict within
the O-RAN architecture are shown in Fig. 1.
The decision conflicts within O-RAN are considered in this article in the context of horizontal
conflicts between xApps in a Near-RT RIC (intraNear-RT RIC) and between Near-RT RICs (interNear-RT RIC). Similar considerations can be
applicable for horizontal conflicts between rApps
(intra-Non-RT RIC), as they provide policy and
non-real-time control decisions similarly to how
xApps provide near-real-time control decisions. As
for the vertical conflicts between the Non-RT RIC
and Near-RT RICs, the Near-RT RIC’s policy-conflicting control decisions may either be rejected or
allowed by the Non-RT RIC. The specific conflict
resolution action should be decided by the Non-RT
RIC based on the affected use case and how the
policies are enforced. The specific logic of how the
Non-RT RIC should resolve conflicts and enforce
its policies is not considered in this article.

tYPes of conflIcts between XAPP decIsIons

O-RAN technical specifications distinguish three
types of conflicts that can happen between xApps
[5], namely direct, indirect, and implicit. The first
of these are direct conflicts, which concern contradicting decisions that happen one after the
other and affect the same set of configuration
parameters. An example of such type of conflict
may be when xApp #1 decides to assign a user
to a cell and right after that xApp #2 decides to
assign the same user to another cell. In this particular scenario, the result of the conflicting actions
will be that only the decision of xApp #2 will have
an effect. Undetected direct conflicts may lead
xApp #1 to draw wrong conclusions about the
effect of its decision.
Another type of conflict in the Near-RT RIC is
the indirect conflict. It refers to a situation where
decisions contradict each other when modifying
parameters that influence the same areas of the
RAN operation. For example, indirect conflicts can
happen between xApps modifying parameters
that influence handover boundaries, such as when
xApp #1 controls an antenna’s electrical tilt and
xApp #2 changes the Cell Individual Offset (CIO).
This may lead to situations where the effective handover boundary fluctuates heavily due to xApps
reacting to each other’s contradicting decisions.
The implicit conflict considers situations in
which conflicting influences of network control
decisions are difficult to observe and determine.
Implicit conflicts are expected when many xApps
simultaneously optimize the RAN operation with
separate goals, controlling different network
parameters. They can appear in a situation where
xApp #1 aims to maximize QoS for a group of
users while xApp #2 attempts to minimize the
number of handovers between neighboring cells;

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decisions made by these two xApps may interfere
in a non-obvious manner, disrupting each other’s
effect on the network.
Conflicts may also happen between Near-RT
RICs that control RAN nodes in close proximity (i.e., the inter-Near-RT RIC conflicts). In such
cases, the conflicting Near-RT RICs provide contradicting RAN control decisions, for example,
triggering a “ping-pong” handover of a user
between cells managed by both Near-RT RICs.
Such network behavior leads to inefficient radio
resource utilization.

Dealing with Conflicts and Related Works

To achieve predictable performance and behavior
of O-RAN, it is necessary to minimize any negative impact of conflicts between xApp decisions.
As prevention is preferred, the design of NearRT RIC implementations should aim to avoid any
conflicts between xApps. Unfortunately, some
conflicts will inevitably happen with various third
parties providing xApps. Therefore, the Near-RT
RIC must be able to resolve any conflicts between
xApp decisions. To do so, the conflict firstly needs
to be detected. Currently, no methods of detecting or resolving conflicts are defined in O-RAN’s
technical specifications as they are considered for
future study [5].
The topic of conflict mitigation in O-RAN has
not yet been significantly covered in research
papers. One of the relevant papers on a related
topic has been published by Zhang et al. [7], who
proposed a team learning algorithm based on
Deep Q-learning that requires two xApps working
in cooperation in an O-RAN environment. While
the referenced work does not describe a universal
solution to the issue of conflicts in O-RAN, it proposes a viable way to mitigate the conflicts using
a cooperative machine learning scheme. Results
of the team learning algorithm showed that when
xApps take into consideration each other’s decisions, the learning process is much more efficient
in comparison to xApps working independently,
leading to overall higher system throughput and
lower packet drop rate. Although promising, this
approach is hard to scale to a larger number of
xApps because the decision logic of all participating xApps needs to adapt to the number of
cooperating xApps and be able to properly interpret their decisions. Therefore, the team learning approach can be utilized only if xApps are
designed with team learning in mind.
Significant work has been done in the area of
conflict mitigation in the context of Self-Organized
Networks (SON). The concept of SON has been
introduced as part of Long Term Evolution (LTE)
networks to reduce operating costs related to
multi-vendor RAN. SON allows for the deployment
of SON functions, which, as xApps and rApps in
O-RAN, are able to modify network behavior,
albeit only locally. Two SON functions widely
considered in research are Mobility Robustness
Optimization (MRO) and Mobility Load Balancing (MLB). Relevant work on conflict mitigation in
the context of SON includes a scheme to resolve
conflicts between MRO and MLB, which limits the
range of changes to CIO values done by MLB [8].
This approach has been improved in later research
to find optimal values of CIO instead of limiting
the range [9]. To address the problem of decision

conflicts in a more general way, a soft classification of conflicts in SON has been proposed [10].
A general framework for self-coordination in SON
has been defined to universally deal with conflicts,
regardless of conflicting SON function types [11];
it describes the concept of SON Coordinator that
adapts network control to current conditions, mitigating any conflicts and providing safeguards from
network performance degradation. Another generalized solution in SON utilizes machine learning
to learn from past experience and predict network
performance to better solve the conflicts [12].
Although RAN control problems in SON and
O-RAN share many similarities (i.e., SON functions and xApps/rApps as conflicting agents, common use cases), the solutions for SON cannot be
directly applied to O-RAN. This is mainly due to a
significant difference in how RAN control is realized in SON and O-RAN. SON functions perform
RAN control locally (i.e., each RAN node optimizes its parameters based on what it can observe),
while RAN control in O-RAN is executed with
RICs, which can observe the entire managed network and optimize it centrally. Nevertheless, the
relevant work on SON can provide insight into
how the problem of conflict mitigation can be
approached and what measures may prove effective in solving the control conflict problems.
Finally, it is worth mentioning multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) methods that
consider multi-agent systems (MAS), where
autonomous agents with various goals perform
actions in a shared environment [13]. In an MAS,
agents’ actions influence each other and need
to be coordinated to reach an optimal state of
the environment. This case can be considered
analogous to the O-RAN scenario, where xApps
and rApps provide RAN control decisions to fulfill
various use cases. According to the O-RAN architecture descriptions provided by O-RAN Alliance,
the default RAN control setting in O-RAN is centralized and features the RICs as coordinators of
RAN control activities. Hence, cooperative and
coordinated MARL approaches could be applied.
Although this is a viable solution, it requires xApps
and rApps to be implemented with MARL in
mind. We consider this a potential evolution path
for the conflict mitigation methods in O-RAN.
However, this article focuses on solutions that can
be applied to all applications, regardless of their
implementation.

The implicit conflict considers situations in which
conflicting influences of
network control decisions are
difficult to observe and determine. Implicit conflicts are
expected when many xApps
simultaneously optimize the
RAN operation with separate
goals, controlling different
network parameters.

Conflict Mitigation Framework

In this article, we propose a framework for conflict mitigation (referred to in the article as CMF)
in O-RAN-compliant environments. The proposed
framework is envisioned as part of the CM component of Near-RT RIC. CMF aims to provide a
robust, standardized method for conflict detection in O-RAN, covering the detection of all three
types of conflict defined in O-RAN specifications.
The proposed framework embedded within the
architecture of Near-RT RIC is shown in Fig. 2.

Structure of CMF and Infrastructure Prerequisites

CMF envisions deploying the Conflict Detection
(CD) Agent and the Conflict Resolution (CR)
Agent components in the Near-RT RIC’s CM entity as agents that detect conflicts between xApps
and resolve them. The main research challenge

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

201

es that are currently in effect, via the Non-RT RIC.
This information shall be a part of the enrichment
information interface between the Non-RT RIC and
Near-RT RICs. Once the Near-RT RICs are aware
of all control decisions for users, cells, and bearers
managed by other Near-RT RICs, these decisions
can be considered as part of the conflict mitigation
procedures for shared control targets.

dIrect conflIct detectIon

FIGURE 2. CMF components embedded within the Near-RT RIC architecture.
for the CD Agent is to enable reliable detection
of all types of conflicts, and for the CR Agent to
enable the resolution of all conflicts to reach an
optimal network state. There are three logical
parts distinguished within the CD Agent that are
dedicated to detection methods for each type of
conflict between xApp decisions. These components are described in the following subsections.
As for the CR Agent, it is assumed that it can
resolve any conflicts detected by the CD Agent.
The operation of CMF relies on the configuration of the O-RAN infrastructure. Data stored by
CMF is kept in the Near-RT RIC’s Database, which
is accessible via the Shared Data Layer (SDL). The
Message Infrastructure in the Near-RT RIC needs
to be configured to redirect all control messages
from xApps into the CM component, so that all
RAN control messages can be evaluated by CMF.
Depending on the results of CMF’s evaluation of
the specific control messages, these messages can
either be allowed to modify the network configuration (with or without modifications, depending
on the logic implemented in the CR Agent) or be
entirely blocked from influencing the network. It
should be acknowledged that adding an additional
step in the RAN control message processing pipeline increases the delay between an xApp providing
a RAN control message and the message influencing the network. As Near-RT RIC aims to control
the network operation in near-real-time scale, any
processing done in the CM component, that is,
in the CD Agent and the CR Agent, needs to be
relatively quick. Another dependency on the NearRT RIC architecture is that the CD Agent needs to
be subscribed to performance management (PM)
data provided by RAN nodes managed by the
Near-RT RIC. This is required for the detection of
implicit conflicts, which is described in details in a
subsequent section.
To mitigate the inter-Near-RT RIC conflicts,
CMF envisions the exchange of information
between Near-RT RICs about RAN control messag-

202

Ideally, direct conflicts should be detected as part
of pre-deployment xApp assessment, which is
done by the MNO deploying the xApps. Nevertheless, a method for detection of direct conflicts
is required as a fail-safe mechanism, for example,
in case of human error leading to deployment of
directly conflicting xApps.
Direct conflicts can be detected by the Direct
Conflict Detection (DCD) component within the
CD Agent. DCD can detect the conflicts pre-action (i.e., before a control decision is effective), as
it detects changes of recently changed parameters related to a user, a cell, or a bearer. All RAN
control messages are tracked by the CD Agent in
the Database (“Recently changed parameters” in
Fig. 2) along with a timestamp, the source xApp,
the control target, the parameters modified by the
message, and the control time span of the message
(i.e., the control duration expected by the xApp).
The conflict detection logic of DCD is as follows: each new control message in the Near-RT
RIC is saved into the Database, then it is compared to all currently effective xApp control decisions; if any decisions share the control target
and at least one of the modified parameters, data
about the conflicting decisions is provided to the
CR Agent. The DCD procedure is illustrated in
Fig. 3, which shows the message exchange flow
between the CMF components.

IndIrect conflIct detectIon

Indirect conflicts cannot be directly observed by
the Indirect Conflict Detection (ICD) component
within the CD Agent, but it can anticipate them
pre-action by having the knowledge of groups
of parameters that influence the same area of
RAN operation. These groups of parameters
can be configured manually by the MNO, predefined in the standards, or learned dynamically during network operation using Performance
Monitoring (described in the next section). The
groups are stored in the Database as Parameter
Groups (PGs) (“Parameter Group definitions” in
Fig. 2). Additionally, the Database stores information about RAN control messages that modify any parameters from these groups (“Recently
changed Parameter Groups” in Fig. 2), with the
same scope of data as “Recently changed parameters” related to DCD.
Detection of indirect conflicts is a slight modification of DCD: it also analyzes each new control
message but first maps the target parameter onto
predefined PGs. After the message is noted against
at least one of the known PGs, ICD checks the
entries in “Recently changed Parameter Groups” to
find any conflicting decisions. If a match is found,
information about the conflicting xApp decisions is
provided to the CR Agent. The conflict detection
logic and related message flow for ICD are shown
in Fig. 3, alongside the DCD procedure.

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IMPlIcIt conflIct detectIon
Implicit conflicts cannot be observed directly, and
the mutual influence between conflicting decisions
is not easily deduced. Therefore, a similar approach,
as described for DCD and ICD, is not suitable for
Implicit Conflict Detection (ImCD), which can only
work reactively. An additional component within
ImCD is required to analyze PM data reported by
RAN nodes and detect any occurrences of network
performance degradation; this role is fulfilled by
the Performance Monitoring (PMon) component
within CMF. Detection of network performance
anomalies can be achieved with either traditional
statistical-based solutions or AI/ML-based approaches [14]. The aim of the PMon component is to
detect any significant RAN Key Performance Indicator (KPI) degradation. ImCD utilizes Near-RT RIC’s
Database accessed via the SDL to store data about
RAN KPI degradation occurrences and KPI degradation-correlated xApp decisions.
The operation of ImCD is not triggered by any
RAN control message but by PMon signaling a
detection of RAN KPI degradation. Once the trigger
is provided, ImCD analyzes which parameters and/or
Parameter Groups have been recently modified by
many control messages. ImCD utilizes the data captured in the Database by DCD and ICD, so it does
not need to monitor any control messages by itself.
If a correlation is found between any recent RAN
control decisions and the observed RAN KPI degradation, ImCD notes it and increments its internal
counters relevant to these control decisions. When
any tracked counter breaches a predefined threshold, the CD Agent provides data about conflicting
xApps’ control decisions to the CR Agent. At this
point in the procedure, the CD Agent may remove
data about RAN KPI degradation occurrences related to the reported conflict from the Database. A
significant difference between DCD/ICD and ImCD
is that the latter works post-action and, therefore,
cannot entirely prevent conflicting RAN control messages from influencing the network. Similar to the
DCD and ICD procedures described earlier, the message exchange flow and conflict detection logic for
the ImCD procedure are depicted in Fig. 4.

eVAluAtIon of the solutIon
sIMulAtIon scenArIo

To evaluate the efficiency of CMF, we simulated a
19-base-station O-RAN network with the base stations (BSs) evenly distributed in an urban environment on a hexagonal grid, 600 meters apart. The
simulation area is limited to approximately outline
the area covered by the network. There are 380
users spread across the area, each with one of three
user profiles (i.e., low, medium, and high bitrate),
chosen randomly with various probabilities (60 % for
low, 30 % for medium, and 10 % for high bitrates).
Users move randomly around the considered area,
either as pedestrians or in a vehicle, generating traffic in the network. Connections can be handed over
between BSs as propagation conditions change.
The simulated network includes a nRT-RIC,
which monitors performance parameters for
all BSs. Within the Near-RT RIC, two xApps are
installed: MRO and MLB. MRO monitors handover statistics of each BS and modifies handover hysteresis and time-to-trigger parameters to

FIGURE 3. Direct and Indirect Conflict Detection message flow.1
minimize the number of radio link failures (RLFs)
and ping-pong handovers. MLB balances the load
of the BSs in the network, choosing CIO values
according to the load of the BSs.
To simulate CMF’s operation, CD and CR Agents
are deployed within the Near-RT RIC. The CD Agent
implements DCD and ICD, that is, it monitors configuration modifications made by xApps and detects
direct and indirect conflicts (ImCD is not applicable
in the considered scenario). If no conflicts are detected, any decisions provided by xApps take effect in
the order they are provided. Otherwise, conflicts are
reported into the CR Agent, which decides if and
when specific decisions take effect. In the considered scenario, CMF can prioritize one of the conflicting xApps. If a given xApp is prioritized, each of its
decisions takes effect on the network regardless of
conflicts. To showcase how CMF is able to mitigate
conflicts between xApps in the considered scenario,

1 Examples of the messages
exchanged by the O-RAN components during CMF operation
are available online for readers’
reference (free access) [15].
The filenames of the messages
in the repository align with the
labels of the message flows
shown in Figs. 3 and 4.

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

203

Enabling conflict resolution with prioritization of
the MRO xApp has a mostly positive effect on network performance. Although the mean load of all
BSs increases slightly, the total number of handover
events decreases by over 7 percent. This positive
impact is due to MRO being able to steer handover parameters without constraints, while changes
in network configuration done by MLB are significantly limited. On the other hand, in case of conflict
with MRO, the MLB xApp is unable to increase the
CIO of heavily loaded BSs, which would otherwise
relieve their load and free up their radio resources
for incoming calls. This limitation leads to an increase
in the number of CBs because users trying to connect to heavily loaded BSs may not receive proper
service due to the lack of available radio resources.
The influence of CMF on network operation
differs when the MLB xApp is prioritized. Mean
user satisfaction increases by 0.7 percent, and the
number of CBs decreases by over 7 percent, along
with just a 0.1 percent increase in mean BS load.
However, all other tracked network performance
indicators deteriorate to varying degrees. CMF limits the RAN control capabilities of the MRO xApp,
preventing it from optimizing handover parameters
in case of conflict with MLB. This leads to more
occurrences of all handovers, including too late
and too early handovers, which cause RLFs.
In conclusion, the “prioritize MRO” mode of
CMF has a more positive impact on the network
compared to the “prioritize MLB” mode, as it causes lesser deterioration of some KPIs in exchange
for its performance improvements. CMF’s influence on KPIs in both modes is shown in Fig. 6.

suMMArY

FIGURE 4. Implicit Conflict Detection message flow.1
a description of ICD operation event sequence is
shown in Fig. 5. Readers interested in the details of
the simulation scenario and the raw result data can
access them online (free access) [15].

eVAluAtIon results

The simulation is conducted with MRO and MLB
xApps activated and one of three modes of CMF
operation: disabled, prioritize MRO, prioritize MLB.
The first 150 seconds out of 1,000 simulated seconds are ignored in the statistics for the sake of
disregarding the initial instability of the simulated network. Tracked network performance indicators are:
• Mean BS load
• Mean user satisfaction
• Number of call blockages (CBs)
• Number of RLFs
• Number of handovers
• Number of ping-pong handovers.
The performance indicators observed for the network with no conflict mitigation in place show a significant number of CBs, RLFs, and handovers, including
ping-pong handovers. The excessive number of handovers causes wasteful utilization of radio resources,
which, in turn, decreases the QoS for the users handled by heavily loaded BSs. In extreme cases, the BSs
drop incoming traffic, therefore causing call blockages. RLFs, on the other hand, are caused by either too
early or too late handovers, which result from suboptimal configuration of handover parameters.

204

In this article, we defined a framework for conflict
mitigation in O-RAN’s Near-RT RIC. By design, it
is capable of mitigating all three types of conflicts
described in the technical specifications published
by O-RAN Alliance: direct, indirect, and implicit conflicts. The proposed framework works by
tracking all RAN control messages sent by xApps
deployed within the Near-RT RICs and monitoring
PM data reported by RAN nodes. The concept
of a conflict mitigation framework is easily scalable and does not impose any restrictions on how
conflict resolution is realized. We provided a complete set of example JSON messages exchanged
as part of the procedures related to the detection
of all types of conflicts between xApps.
The efficiency of the CMF concept was proven
with a simulation of an O-RAN network with and
without mitigation of xApp conflicts. The simulation results show that enabling CMF, even with
a basic scheme of conflict resolution, can reduce
the negative effects of xApp conflicts.
Defining the CMF is envisioned as the first step
in providing a standardized conflict mitigation
method in the Near-RT RIC. We expect future
work in this field to include:
• The development of the PMon component,
potentially with use of AI/ML-based tools for
detection of performance degradation
• The development of the CR Agent entity,
compatible with CMF, and with optimal conflict resolution logic for each type of conflict
in the Near-RT RIC
• Open source implementations of CMF for
utilization in O-RAN networks.

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

references

[1] O-RAN Working Group 1, O-RAN Architecture Description,
O-RAN Alliance, Oct. 2022, v07.00.
[2] O-RAN Working Group 1, O-RAN Use Cases Analysis
Report, O-RAN Alliance, October 2022, v09.00.
[3] O-RAN Minimum Viable Plan and Acceleration Towards
Commercialization, O-RAN Alliance, June 2021.
[4] M. Polese et al., “Understanding O-RAN: Architecture,
Interfaces, Algorithms, Security, and Research Challenges,”
2022; available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.01032.
[5] O-RAN Working Group 3, Near-Real-time RAN Intelligent
Controller Architecture, O-RAN Alliance, Oct. 2022, v03.00.
[6] O-RAN Working Group 2, Non-Real-time RAN Intelligent
Controller Functional Architecture, O-RAN Alliance, June
2021, v01.01.
[7] H. Zhang, H. Zhou, and M. Erol-Kantarci, “Team Learning-Based Resource Allocation for Open Radio Access
Network (O-RAN),” CoRR, vol. abs/2201.07385, 2022;
available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07385.
[8] Z. Liu et al., “Conflict Avoidance between Mobility Robustness Optimization and Mobility Load Balancing,” Proc. 2010
IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., 2010.
[9] M. Huang and J. Chen, “A Conflict Avoidance Scheme
between Mobility Load Balancing and Mobility Robustness
Optimization in Self-Organizing Networks,” Wirel. Netw.,
vol. 24, no. 1, Jan. 2018, p. 271–81; available: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11276-016-1331-y
[10] H. Y. Lateef, A. Imran, and A. Abu-dayya, “A Framework
for Classification of Self-Organising Network Conflicts and
Coordination Algorithms,” Proc. 2013 IEEE 24th Annual Int’l.
Symposium Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Commun.,
2013, pp. 2898–2903.
[11] L. C. Schmelz et al., “A Coordination Framework for
Self-Organisation in LTE Networks,” Proc. 12th IFIP/IEEE
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management and Workshops, 2011, pp. 193–200.
[12] J. Moysen et al., “Conflict Resolution in Mobile Networks:
A Selfcoordination Framework Based on Non-Dominated
Solutions and Machine Learning for Data Analytics [Application Notes],” IEEE Computational Intelligence Mag., vol. 13,
no. 2, 2018, pp. 52–64.
[13] A. Nowé, P. Vrancx, and Y.-M. De Hauwere, Game Theory
and Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning, Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 441–70; available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-27645-3 14.
[14] P. Casas et al., “Machine-Learning Based Approaches for
Anomaly Detection and Classification in Cellular Networks,”
04, 2016.
[15] C. Adamczyk, “Conflict Mitigation Framework — Supplementary Information — IEEE ComMag 2023,” 2023,
accessed 23 Jan. 2023; available: https://github.com/czezy/
O-RAN CMF CM2023.

FIGURE 5. ICD event sequence in the considered scenario.

bIogrAPhIes

C EZARY A DAMCZYK is a PhD student at Poznan University of
Technology, conducting research in the field of AI/ML utilization in open radio access network radio resource optimization. He works as an OSS Solutions Architect in international
telecommunication projects. His prior work related to O-RAN
includes a paper proposing a novel Reinforcement Learning
algorithm for optimizing radio resources utilization.
A DRIAN K LIKS received his postdoctoral degree in technical
computer science and telecommunications in February 2019.
He works as an associate professor at Poznan University of
Technology and has taken part in numerous industrial and commissioned projects. He leads OPUS projects on V2X communication and RISes. An IEEE Senior Member since 2013. In the
years 2014-2016 he was the IEEE Membership Development/
Web Visibility Chair for the EMEA area. Since 2019 — the editorin-chief of the J. Telecommunications and Information Technology of the Institute of Communications. A vice chair of the IEEE
VTS Polish Chapter.

FIGURE 6. Simulation results showing performance influence of CMF.

IEEE Communications Magazine • December 2023

Authorized licensed use limited to: Amrita School of Engineering. Downloaded on July 08,2026 at 09:02:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

205

