FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

1

This is the author’s version of an article that has been accepted for publication in IEEE Network. Changes were made to this version by
the publisher prior to publication. The final published article is available at https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.131.2200528

Failure Management in 5G RAN:
Challenges and Open Research Lines
Antonio Tarrı́as, Sergio Fortes, and Raquel Barco
Abstract— Failure management is one of the key aspects
in cellular networks. 5G technology is introducing several novel
features that will cause the occurrence of new problems in the
network. The objective of the present work is to identify which
features may lead to potential network failures. In this way,
failure management has been addressed by identifying a subset
of problems in the RAN domain and classifying them under
the categories of coverage, mobility, and interference. They were
analyzed in order to know how they are in line with 3GPP
specifications. Based on this, the present work proposes a novel
failure management approach, applying it for failure simulation
and impact analysis over the network performance.
Index Terms—5G, Failure, RAN, mmWave, Beamforming.

I NTRODUCTION
Global mobile network data traffic has grown in the last
years, resulting in an increment in the number of connections
as well as high data rate applications. Therefore, cellular
networks have increasingly experienced a huge amount of
enhancements and novel features in each new generation.
Similarly, 5G aims to serve all the new use cases (UCs).
5G UCs have been categorized into: eMBB (enhanced Mobile
Broadband), that provides high capacity and data rates in zones
where there are no mobility requirements; URLLC (Ultra-High
Reliability and Low Latency), covering services that are especially sensitive to latency and reliability; and mMTC (Massive
Machine-Type Communications), where low individual data
rates are provided to a huge number of devices. Nevertheless,
the number of UCs is not limited to the aforementioned three.
There exist lots of them which do not completely fit in any
of the UCs identified above, for instance, services that need
reliability but are not sensible to latency constraints. This
becomes even more challenging for the 5G network to provide
availability to each service. Thus, the network definitely has to
be really flexible. This has been one of the design principles,
along with forward compatibility and ultra-lean design. Not
only the variety of services but also the wide range of carrier
frequencies call for network flexibility and adaptability.
However, 5G related problems have not been assessed in
depth yet. The heterogeneity of 5G scenarios, where different
UCs cooperate, will cause the occurrence of different types
of network failures. In the same way, the novel features
which have been introduced in 5G such as millimeter wave
(mmWave) spectrum, beamforming or Time Division Duplex
(TDD) will bring better capacities to the network but also
will require to be properly managed to mitigate their negative counterparts, for instance, high path losses inherent to
mmWave signals.
The authors are with the Telecommunication Research Institute (TELMA),
University of Malaga, Spain

Considering this complexity, Machine Learning (ML)
techniques, also a remarkably growing area, have to be applied for failure management [1] in order to learn from data
instead of being based on pre-programmed instructions. In
this way, they can provide automation to failure management
mechanisms by reducing the human action. Large quantity
of network data can be exploited using Deep Learning (DL)
approaches [2] and benefit from unsupervised techniques to
process unlabeled data. This is, together with the integration
of Artificial Intelligence (AI) for network management, one of
the main topics which is also being addressed with regards to
6G [3]. The scope Self-Organizing Networks (SON) paradigm
is achieving ML techniques to aid the root cause analysis,
which has been the hardest part of the failure management
process [4], leading many works to only address a common
problem: the cell outage detection, without further analysis.
Similarly, 5G will allow to the localization of users
as well as other context information coming from different
sources, where the Big Data analysis comes into play. This
information will need to be retrieved either in real time
or from historic databases and adapted to a unified format.
Conventionally, failure modeling has been studied from a
self-healing perspective, where the network is able to detect
a failure, determine its cause, and take actions in order to
compensate it until it is fully recovered [5]. Nevertheless,
the network has mostly been the only source of information,
being, for example, the localization of users, an inaccurate
estimation. Conversely, some approaches aim to predict Radio
Link Failures (RLF) based on radio measurements (RSRP,
RSRQ, RSSI...), but they do not consider lower layers aspects
(e.g., beamforming) or mmWave spectrum [6].
The contribution of the present work is to identify potential problems in 5G networks by assessing which of the
novel features will be relevant from a failure management
perspective. Hence, this paper illustrates how users’ locations
play an important role in either of the identified failures. In
addition, this work analyses how the proposed failures fit into
the standards, considering which information is reported by
UEs to the network as well as which parameters are configurable. Then, a failure identification framework is proposed
and used for modeling the impact of a subset of these failures
on a complete network simulation.

5G C HALLENGES
This work focuses on the Radio Access Network (RAN),
known as New Radio (5G-NR). Given the mobile nature of
users and the changing environment, wireless communications
become more susceptible to failures, especially in 5G, where
novel technologies are included.

©Copyright 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective
works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

36.300

LTE+5G

2

Interference Mngmt
I
Remote
Cross-Link
Interference Interference
H Management
Management

38.300

Self-optimization
Load balancing
Load reporting
Handover adaptation/
Reselection configuration

eIMTA

38.331 (RRC)
Beam measurements Events
Performance
Network
Mngmt
Mngmt

28.552
28.540
Rates Counters
MRO Intra- Inter-system UDR RIM
SSB Index
28.541
system
F Unnecessary Beam info BWP 28.554
Ping-pong G SSB Periodicity KPIs

A

OSS (Operations Support System)
Self-Optimization

BC
DE

Self-Healing

23.288
Monitoring NWDAF

ML
Techniques

Compensation
and Recovery
Actions

Cell level
KPIs UE Locations Context Info
metrics
UE
Beamforming Interference
Reports Info
Management Info

Scenario
Information

Fig. 1. 5G heterogeneous scenario with presence of failures. The left part of the figure represents where different failures may occur within a complex
scenario. The right part details the process of collecting information and metrics from the scenario and passing them to the OSS. The top right boxes relate
the OSS functions with the 3GPP specifications. Moreover, the red boxes refer to LTE topics, green boxes to 5G topics and blue boxes to LTE/5G common
topics. 3GPP specification numbering is included for each topic. In addition, letters locate the problems described in Section 5G Challenges and Table I on
the scenario.

The following general definition established by [7] has
been assumed. A problem is a situation of service degradation,
for instance, congestion. A problem is caused by the fault
cause (failure), for example, bad parameter configuration.
There are novel features who have been introduced in
5G as enablers for better network performance, that may entail
some disadvantages. Regarding mmWaves, they provide higher
data rates, lower latencies as well as more capacity, since
channels are larger at those bands. However, it is important
to overcome their high path losses and their susceptibility to
obstacles or outdoor to indoor propagation. For this purpose,
beamforming techniques aim to minimize those effects by
steering the signals onto predefined directions to improve the
signal strength. However, beamforming schemes require the
exchange of signaling between the gNBs and UEs in order
to properly estimate the channel quality and maintain the
link even when the users are moving. In this sense, TDD
operation enables information transmission continuously in
both directions using the same channel, so reciprocity can
be assumed between downlink (DL) and uplink (UL) , and
signaling overload is reduced. Although it may seem an ideal
solution, the use of TDD causes interference between close
gNBs if their patterns (i.e., time slots used for DL and UL) are
not synchronized. Therefore, getting such higher capabilities
is not always simple and some drawbacks must be addressed.
For the sake of clarity, all identified problems within
this paper have been classified into three main categories:
coverage, mobility, and interference. They are highly related
to user positions and scenarios density and heterogeneity. On
the one hand, Table I contains the most relevant identified
problems related to 5G, together with a potential cause. On
the other hand, Fig. 1 represents a complete 5G scenario,
where key failures are depicted. In order to identify them in

the figure, each of them are labeled with a diferent letter (AG). Here, it is illustrated how an urban micro cell operating
at mmWave frequency is being blocked by a building, so
the beam becomes unsuitable at that location for the user.
Here, beam switching procedures should be triggered when
detecting the situation (See B, Fig. 1). In addition, two gNBs
are providing coverage to close areas. Interference could likely
occur as a result of the use of TDD, so it would be necessary
to align their TDD patterns (See I, Fig. 1). These categorized
failures will be extended in the following subsections.
TABLE I
I DENTIFIED P ROBLEMS BY C ATEGORIES
Category
Coverage

Problem

(A) Long time initial access
(B) Reduction in cell power
(C) Coverage hole
Mobility
(D) Too late/early beam switching
(E) Too late/early beam failure detect.
(F) Inter-system unnecessary HO
(G) Inter-system ping-pong
Interference (H) Remote interference
(I) Cross-link interference (CLI)

Potential Cause
Beamset config.
HW/Config. problem
Beam blockage
Beam reporting config.
L1 thresholds config.
HO thresholds config.
HO thresholds config.
Out of sync TDD
Out of sync TDD

Coverage
Operators carefully plan each cell location to maximize
the coverage with an optimal number of sites. Nevertheless,
cells may fail or be improperly configured, so coverage
problems will take place.
Here, the first identified failure is (A) Long time Initial
Access (IA), and it is related to beamforming configuration.
Thus, Synchronization Signals Bursts (SSB) are transmitted in

FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

a sweeping procedure, by changing beam direction for each
SSB transmission with a periodicity (𝑇𝑆𝑆 ). For very small 𝑇𝑆𝑆 ,
the impact of the SSB is considerable, with up to 43 percent of
the resources allocated. In contrast, it enables a larger number
of opportunities in which a UE can receive synchronization
signals. This improves reactivity related to the tracking and the
transmission of Channel State Information Reference Signals
(CSI-RSs). If the number of directions to be swept is reduced,
the beam sweeping procedure is completed in a single burst
and 𝑇𝑆𝑆 does not impact the time required to perform initial
access (𝑇𝐼 𝐴) [8].
Then, (B) Reduction in cell power is a problem that arised
in previous generations. It usually depends on a hardware
or wiring problem, but it could also occur due to a wrong
parameter configuration. Regarding the latter, the beamforming configuration can be a possible cause in 5G. Failures
can appear not only due to the larger number of antenna
elements forming the antenna arrays, but also the beamforming
scheme. Here, being 𝐾 𝐵𝐹 the number of Radio Frequency
(RF) chains and 𝑀 the number of antenna elements, there
are three possible schemes: analog (𝐾 𝐵𝐹 = 1), allowing only
one direction at a given time; digital (𝐾 𝐵𝐹 = 𝑀), enabling
the transceiver to direct beams at many directions; or hybrid
(𝐾 𝐵𝐹 < 𝑀), where the transceiver can simultaneously use
𝐾 𝐵𝐹 directions. The latter two means that the transmission
power must be reduced by the number of directions/beams,
because the total power constraint applies to the beams on
balance.
Similarly, (C) Coverage holes cannot be considered a
novelty with respect to previous generation, but their probability of occurrence noticeably increases because of mmWaves
propagation constraints. Their difficulty to surpass obstacles or
their sensibility to external conditions will lead to this problem.
Thus, it will be necessary to increase the capacity of coverage
hole detection, even to detect beam-level coverage holes. The
concept of occasional obstacle arises, so it cannot be assumed
that holes are permanent on the scenario.
Mobility
The mobility is an inherent characteristic of users in
cellular networks, and it can lead to many problems as well.
Although the occurrence of mobility problems in previous generations has been mainly caused by handover (HO) problems,
the use of beamforming may lead to problems in concentrated
areas such as beam failures, which will need to be seamlessly
fixed [9].
Although (D) beam switching is designed to be triggered automatically during operation, NR also supports UE
triggered mechanisms to recover from beam failure. This
occurs when the quality of beam pair link(s) of an associated
control channel falls low enough (e.g., comparison with a
threshold, time-out of an associated timer). (E) Too early/late
beam failure can be considered particular cases of radio link
failure (RLF). When a UE declares RLF being the cause a
beam failure recovery problem, it is indicated to the network,
therefore network notes it for future parameter optimization.
Regarding too early beam failure determination, it leads to

3

a latency increase, whose severity is determined by the use
cases. In contrast, too late beam failure determination causes
a connection outage, so recovery mechanisms take longer time.
(F) Inter-System Unnecessary HO arises with 5G-LTE
networks coexistence. Handovers to LTE are performed, especially in cases of low link quality or lack of coverage.
Triggering inter-system HO unnecessarily causes a decrease
on system performance. Nevertheless, regarding Release 18,
3GPP System Aspects Working Groups (WGs) are promoting
the concept of inter-Radio Access Technologies (RATs) HOs
since inter-system and intra-system HOs only consider the core
network changes and they are not as useful as RAT changes
from a management perspective [10].
In a similar way, (G) Inter-System Ping-pong HO is also
impactful, mainly in borders of coverage zones, where RATs
recurrently change their availability (e.g., outside of a city). It
is accounted when an UE is handed over back to the source
cell within a predefined limited time.
Interference
Interference has been an issue in every generation, but
it has been traditionally addressed by acting on cells’ transmission powers and tilt angles. However, two interference
problems derive from the use of TDD, which is key for 5G
networks operation as previously mentioned.
On the one hand, (H) Remote Interference (RI) refers
to the case where distant cells interfere each other. This is
typically caused by atmospheric phenomena which affects to
signals by allowing them to reach distances farther than normal
when they are trapped in the atmospheric duct [11]. DL and
UL transmissions are usually separated by a guard interval to
avoid interference, but in case of long distances, propagation
delay may exceed the guard interval, causing interference to
cells which are sited far away.
On the other hand, (I) Cross-Link Interference (CLI) is
a problem appearing between close sites. There are two types
of CLI: gNB-gNB (or DL-to-UL), which means that an UE
is transmitting data in UL to a gNB, but another gNB is
transmitting data in DL, so its higher power may affect the
UE transmission; and UE-UE (or UL-to-DL) interference, that
happen when a UE is receiving DL data, but another close UE
is transmitting in UL. They come out where TDD patterns
are different from each other, and synchronization may not
be the solution because of the different network services and
requirements.
A PPLICABLE S TANDARDS
This section describes how the aforementioned network
problems are considered and addressed in the network management approach defined by the 5G standards. 3GPP defines
the standards for 5G. Nevertheless, there are some aspects
missing which are particularly handled by networks operators
(e.g., HO algorithms). Similarly, network failures are not
usually described by 3GPP but the operators and literature
spot them and work on their mitigation. Regarding 3GPP,
specification numbering is used to divide subjects. Firstly,

FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

LTE subjects are contained in 36 series and NR aspects are
introduced in 38 series, called Radio technology beyond LTE.
Here, an overall description of each technology is provided
in TS 36.300 [12] and TS 38.300 [11]. In Fig. 1, blue boxes
refer to aspects that are shared between LTE and NR, while
red and green boxes refer to specific aspects for LTE and NR,
respectively. In the figure, numbers refers to specific 3GPP
specifications where each issue is described. There are several
differences between them as LTE is more evolved than NR, but
the experience allows to become aware of some key aspects.
An heterogeneous scenario is presented in the figure, including
the three main UCs (eMBB, URLLC, mMTC) stated above.
Then, information coming from the scenario is collected and
used as input for OSS (Operations Support System) operation,
where different actions could be taken for self-optimization
and self-healing purposes.
In terms of mobility, it also introduces indications related
to beamforming. The measurement model defined by a two
layer scheme for beam measurement: layer 1 filtering, where
the UE measures a configurable number of beams to derive
their quality; and layer 3 (RRC, Radio Resource Control)
filtering, where cell quality is derived from multiple beams.
But, Mobility Robustness Optimization (MRO), which is a
3GPP-defined feature, will need further development in order to efficiently support beam management, including beam
reporting, beam switching, beam failure detection, and beam
failure recovery procedures.
Regarding Radio Link Failure (RLF), UEs perform Radio
Link Monitoring (RLM) basing on reference signals and signal
quality thresholds configured by the network. UEs are in
charge of declaring RLF when meeting one of the multiple
criteria (e.g., expiry of a timer started after indication of radio
problems from the physical layer). RLF cause determination
functionality is able to distinguish causes and report them,
even informing about if they are related to an unsuccessful
beam failure recovery.
Furthermore, it is key to retrieve information about the
system performance. For this aim, 3GPP defines performance
measurements, including performance indicators, which contain data aggregated over a group of NFs, or measurement
families, which relate to a given functionality. This way, it
is possible to obtain valuable data from the network perspective (e.g., radio resource utilization, number of RRC
connections, counters about mobility management, etc). The
latter includes the number of requested HO, distinguishing
between successful and failed, as well as intra/inter-system,
too early/late, unnecessary, and ping-pong HOs. In contrast,
limited measurements are defined in terms of beamforming,
except for the number of UE related to the SSB beam index,
which can enable awareness about user physical distribution,
which helps, for example, to detect people clustering.
Network Management Overview
The concept of SON (Self-Organizing Networks) was
introduced by 3GPP in Release 8, and it encompasses SelfConfiguration, Self-Optimization, and Self-Healing. Firstly,
Self-Optimization aims to provide a high quality user ex-

4

perience while improving the system capacity, as well as
to minimize human intervention to achieve it. Here, both
specifications about LTE and 5G [11, 12] contain information
about load balancing and MRO, where inter-RAT HO has
changed its name to inter-system HO. However, application
layer solutions, which means that high level applications
indicate their real-time requirements, are feasible for choosing
the RAT from UE side, for example, not enabling the mmWave
range if a chat application is not going to need it, but doing
so when a video streaming application is running. Although
they are not initially considered from network management,
application layer inputs are likely to be used as context
information in a near future.
Interference, both remote and cross-link, are present in
[11] and not in [12], which shows that they were not considered in LTE as TDD was only implemented in particular
countries due to spectrum limitations.
Furthermore, the RRC protocol defines the events which
are reported to the network: A2, serving cell becomes worse
than threshold; A3, Neighbor becomes offset better than
special cell; A4, neighbor becomes better than threshold; and
so on. These events are commonly used for HO algorithms
configuration. Operators configure the thresholds and select
the events to trigger (e.g., events A2 and A4 must be met).
Although most events were defined for LTE, it is appreciable
the event I1 (Interference becomes higher than threshold),
which is appearing for the first time in specifications.
Moreover, 3GPP Release 15 introduced a new architecture element: NWDAF (Network Data Analytics Function),
in charge of data collection based on subscription to events
provided by the AMF (Access and Mobility Management
Function); SMF (Session Management Function); PCF (Policy
Control Function); UDM (Unified Data Management); AF
(Application Function); and OAM (Operations, Administration, and Maintenance), responsible for retrieval of information
from data repositories and network functions (NF), as well as
provision of analytics to NF and AF. This function is expected
to pave the way towards the potential of ML techniques to
enable network automation [13], becoming an element to
be taken into account from the self-healing perspective. 5G
establishes a Unified Data Repository (UDR), where Network
Functions (NF) can store and retrieve data, becoming an
important source of information for network management
procedures. Classes and attributes are defined to have an
overview about configuration possibilities (e.g., Bandwidth
parts, Synchronization Signal Burst (SSB) periodicity, perbeam information, etc). Beam-related information extends to
beam azimuth, beam tilt, and vertical and horizontal beam
widths. Besides, some key parameters and timers for optimization and healing purposes are : qOffsetRangeList, in charge of
specifying the metric (RSRP, RSRQ, or SINR) and the signal
(SSB or CSI-RS) to be applied when evaluating candidates
for cell reselection or triggering conditions for measurement
reporting; threshXHighP/threshXLowP, a threshold used by
UE when reselecting towards a higher/lower priority RAT or
frequency band; or tReselectionNr, a cell reselection timer that
can be multiplied with a factor if the UE is in high mobility

FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

5

Fig. 2. Failure Modeling approach.

state.
F RAMEWORK A ND R ESULTS
The lack of 5G Standalone deployments is the major
drawback for research. This leads to a difficult collection
of information, including datasets, and promotes the use of
simulators for this purpose. As for this study, ns-3 simulator
tool [14] can be used to emulate some of the previous failure
situations while retrieving metrics at physical layer. Regarding
simulation tools, many of them are introducing propagation
models that work at higher frequencies, as well as other
changes at lower layers, for example, numerologies, since
that they were previously defined in Release 15. But these
simulation tools generally missing some of the key functionalities: HO, beamforming management aspects or system level
perspective.
Problem identification requires data monitoring. The gaps
between UCs will complicate the problem identification due
to the fact that a network configuration may be beneficial for
some UCs while degrading the performance of others. Besides
that, a failure can happen in a limited area, for example,
one beam is being blocked by an obstacle. It is important
to point out that this example will have more probability of
occurrence owing to the less robust propagation characteristics
in comparison with LTE. This limited blocking problem,
which can be considered as a coverage hole, will affect only
few users. Thus, the network will be often unable to detect
them since general metrics (e.g., cell-level metrics) may not
be affected. To detect this kind of failures, trace collection
will need to be precise, which results in higher resource
consumption. Similarly, if problems occur in a short period of
time, they will also require to increase temporal granularity of
network data collection. All this becomes even more complex
with the number of variables to monitor.
In this respect, ML techniques will play a key role. They
have traditionally been divided into three types: classification,
clustering, and regression. Classification is referred to supervised mechanisms that requires labeled data to train the model,
so it will be less applicable to these problems at first due to

the lack of already classified datasets. In contrast, clustering
means unsupervised mechanisms where raw data can be used
as input. This may be extremely important to differentiate
the UCs, as mentioned before, really different among them.
However, regression techniques will help us to predict how
network will react in the presence of given characteristics, so
the operators will be aware of the quality of experience they
will be able to offer.
Here, the approach illustrated in Fig. 2 is proposed for the
failure modeling of 5G networks. It consists of configuration
sets, where the first is considered normal and the rest have
intentionally misconfigured parameters. This is not affordable
in commercial networks because it involves service degradations and outages, but in simulations or pilot networks it
could provide insights on how the novel features may cause
problems. The proposed framework aims to exploit metrics
from network, users and context, being the latter not fully
exploited thus far and whose acquisition is usually complex.
This means that data from different sources will be different
in terms of nature and format; therefore, they have to be
integrated and unified. Then, the interpretation of the data
could be done both via human experts, and statistical and MLbased algorithms, with the objective of detecting problems and
identifying their causes. Thus, it is possible to compare all the
reported information in both situations (normal and degraded)
and check which metrics are affected the most in each case.
In this sense, simulation offers the possibility to easily access
them, for instance, the exact location of each user. Finally,
this offline phase based on simulation will benefit failure
management by extrapolating the algorithms to real network
deployments, where some parts are immediate (e.g., data
formatting and integration) and others (e.g., problem detection
thresholds) may need adjustment to the real environment.
mmWave Outage
Firstly, Fig. 3 depicts the SINR degradation caused by
a temporal cell outage under the scenario remarked with a
dotted red square in Fig. 2. It is important to highlight that
three cells are sited in the same place with different azimuth

FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

6

30
25
20
SINR (dB)

angles, and the user is moving at constant speed following the
path represented in violet color. The path shows that the best
cell quality according to user’s position is given by cell A,
but then the user moves to the coverage area of cell B. This is
appreciable in the SINR graph, where the user starts reporting
the orange cell as the best after the outage occurrence. Due
to the fact that the simulation is working at 28 GHz carrier
frequency, it is noticeable that the other cells SINR levels are
mostly not suitable for the user. Similarly, marked peaks might
be considered an obstacle, so the action to be taken should be
different from the previous case as well as UC-dependent.

15
10
5

8 beams
16 beams
0 Beamforming Periodicity
100 ms
5
200 ms
3 m/s

8 beams

UE Speed

40

16 beams

10 m/s

Fig. 4. SINR degradation due to beamforming periodicity increase.

SINR(dB)

20

0

20
A
B
C

40

92

94

96

98
Time

100

102

interference” (Low Intfc.) means that cells in the scenario are
configured with different TDD patterns in order to minimize
the interference. Moreover, “high interference” (High Intfc.)
corresponds to the case where all cells were configured with
the same TDD pattern, so the interference would be maximum.
For the latter, it can be seen that interference leads to the
appearance of up to three peaks on the SINR PDF, while the
former pattern smooths those peaks, which means that SINR
values are condensed in a smaller range.

Fig. 3. Perceived SINR by a user during an outage at mmWave carrier
frequency.

Beamforming Configuration

Cross-Link Interference
Finally, the CLI problem, depicted in the dotted green
square of Fig. 2 is addressed. It is important to consider that
TDD interference affects edge and center users differently.
Global impact on mean SINR, computed from all users,
is negligible, although it is considerable for certain users.
This means that CLI will be difficult to detect from the
network side since network metrics may not be affected. Fig. 5
represents the Probability Density Function (PDF) of the SINR
measured by the UEs located at the cell center and edge under
two different TDD pattern configurations In the figure, “low

0.03
PDF

On the other side, the periodicity with which UEs change
the beam they are connected to is relevant, especially when
they are moving perpendicularly to the beams directions, as
shown in the dotted blue square of Fig. 2. The impact of
changing the periodicity of computing the beamforming vector
was simulated as it can be observed in Fig. 4. Thus, the left
part of the figure represents the case where UE speed is 3
m/s while the right part corresponds to 10 m/s UE speed. In
the figure, the SINR median, percentile, and extreme values
are represented at different gNB beamforming configurations,
8 and 16 beams, respectively. It is significant the relation
between the UE speed, especially its angular velocity, and
the SINR degradation experienced when the periodicity of
beamforming selection was increased. The beamforming configuration with 16 beams is generally better, but it requires
more antenna elements and signaling.

Case
Edge Low Intfc.
Edge High Intfc.
Center Low Intfc.
Center High Intfc.

0.04

0.02
0.01
0.00

5

0

5

10
15
SINR (dB)

20

25

30

Fig. 5. PDF of SINR degradation caused by Cross-Link Interference at both
cell edge and center.

Hence, in the context of 5G networks, there will be two
points that will make the difference regarding the preceding
generation. On the one hand, the localization and the context
will provide the network management algorithms a large
amount of information collected from several sources, whether
about events, weather or traffic [15]. This will open up new
ways of processing such context information together with
high accurate user locations. Thus, 3GPP System Aspects
WGs, especially WG5 that is in charge of Management,
Orchestration and Charging, discuss location topics in Release
18, such as the possibility of providing UE speed and orientation information to NWDAF through Minimization of Drive
Test (MDT) data collection mechanism [10]. The modular 5G
architecture is also in place for future integration of techniques
that exploit these data.

FIRST SUBMITTED TO “IEEE NETWORK” IN OCTOBER, 2022

C ONCLUSIONS
The aim of this work has been to assess the current
status of 5G development in order to identify which novel
features may potentially lead to problem situation. Classic
network OAM procedures have been reviewed from a failure
management perspective, as well as the 3GPP updates with
respect to the previous version of specifications.
Three problems have been validated under simulation,
demonstrating the relevance of location and speed awareness
for the management of such failures.
In addition, the current lack of real data for future
development has been pointed out, where context information
is deemed indispensable for OAM. Hence, this work aimed at
setting the ground to research on 5G failure modeling from
the network management perspective.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant no.
871249, project LOCUS; Spanish Ministry of economic affairs
and Digital Transformation and European Union - NextGenerationEU within the framework “Recuperación, Transformación
y Resiliencia y el Mecanismo de Recuperación y Resiliencia”
under the project MAORI. This work has been also funded
by: Spanish Ministry of Universities through the program
“Ayudas para la formación de profesorado universitario” (Ref.
FPU20/02863).
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Mulvey, C. H. Foh, M. A. Imran, and R. Tafazolli, “Cell Fault
Management Using Machine Learning Techniques,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 124 514–124 539, 2019.
[2] M. Z. Asghar, M. Abbas, K. Zeeshan, P. Kotilainen, and T. Hämäläinen,
“Assessment of Deep Learning Methodology for Self-Organizing 5G
Networks,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 15, p. 2975, jul 2019.
[3] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Karagiannidis,
and P. Fan, “6G Wireless Networks: Vision, Requirements, Architecture,
and Key Technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 28–41, 2019.
[4] M. Solé, V. Muntés-Mulero, A. I. Rana, and G. Estrada, “Survey on
Models and Techniques for Root-Cause Analysis,” 2017.
[5] J. Ramiro and K. Hamied, Self-organizing networks: self-planning, selfoptimization and self-healing for GSM, UMTS and LTE. John Wiley
& Sons, 2011.
[6] K. Boutiba, M. Bagaa, and A. Ksentini, “Radio Link Failure Prediction
in 5G Networks,” in 2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[7] R. Barco, P. Lazaro, and P. Munoz, “A unified framework for selfhealing in wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 50,
no. 12, pp. 134–142, 2012.
[8] M. Giordani, M. Polese, A. Roy, D. Castor, and M. Zorzi, “A Tutorial
on Beam Management for 3GPP NR at mmWave Frequencies,” IEEE
Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 173–196, 2019.
[9] S. Hailu, K. Pedersen, A. Karimidehkordi, F. Abinader, C. Rom, and
N. Kolehmainen, “Performance analysis of MAC-based beam tracking
and failure detection and recovery,” in 2021 IEEE 93rd Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2021-Spring), 2021, pp. 1–5.
[10] Meeting #146, 3GPP TSG SA WG5, Nov. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/TSG SA/WG5 TM/TSGS5 146/
[11] 3GPP, “NR; NR and NG-RAN Overall description; Stage-2,” Technical
Specification (TS) 38.300, 10 2020, version 16.3.0. [Online]. Available:
http://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/38300.htm [Accessed: 2020-12-20]
[12] ——, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) and
Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN);
Overall description; Stage 2,” Technical Specification (TS) 36.300,

7

10 2020, version 16.3.0. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/
DynaReport/36300.htm [Accessed: 2020-12-20]
[13] A. Ghosh, A. Maeder, M. Baker, and D. Chandramouli, “5G Evolution:
A View on 5G Cellular Technology Beyond 3GPP Release 15,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 127 639–127 651, 2019.
[14] M. Mezzavilla, M. Zhang, M. Polese, R. Ford, S. Dutta, S. Rangan,
and M. Zorzi, “End-to-End Simulation of 5G mmWave Networks,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2237–2263,
thirdquarter 2018.
[15] S. Fortes, D. Palacios, I. Serrano, and R. Barco, “Applying Social Event
Data for the Management of Cellular Networks,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 36–43, 2018.

B IOGRAPHIES

A NTONIO TARR ÍAS (atm@ic.uma.es) received a
M.S. in Telematics and Telecommunication Networks in 2020 from the University of Malaga, Spain.
In 2019, he started to work as research assistant and
assistant professor with the Department of Communications Engineering. Currently, he is pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in the field of cellular communications.

S ERGIO F ORTES (sfr@ic.uma.es) holds a M.S. and
a Ph.D. in Telecommunication Engineering from the
University of Malaga. He began his career being
part of main european space agencies (DLR, CNES,
ESA) and Avanti Communications plc, where he participated in various research and consultant activities
on broadband and aeronautical satellite communications. In 2012, he joined the University of Malaga,
where his research is focused on Self-Organizing
Networks for cellular communications.

R AQUEL BARCO (rbm@ic.uma.es) is M.S. and
Ph.D. in telecommunications from the University of
Málaga, where she is currently Full Professor. She
has worked at Telefónica, Spain, and at the European
Space Agency, and she participated in a Mobile
Communication Systems Competence Center, jointly
created by Nokia and the UMA. She has published
more than 120 scientific papers, filed several patents,
and has lead projects with major companies.

